Latest
News
Reviews
Hardware
Features
Videos
Guides
Bestest Bests
Free games
Discord
Deals
Podcasts
RSS
Supporters
Support us
Get our newsletter
Sign in / Create account
© 2025 Rock Paper Shotgun, an IGN Entertainment, Inc. brand. 18 Mansell Street Level 3, London, E1 8AA, United Kingdom. All rights reserved. No part of this website or its
content may be reproduced without the copyright owner's permission. Rock Paper Shotgun is a registered trademark of Gamer Network Limited, an aQliate of IGN
Entertainment, Inc.
Helpful Links
About Us
Advertise with us
Archive
Authors
Contact Us
Corporate Site
Interactive Maps
Newsletters
RSS Feeds
Policies
Accessibility Policy
AdChoices
Code of Conduct
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Editorial Policy
Privacy Policy
Review Policy
Terms & Conditions
Gamer Network
Dicebreaker
Digital Foundry
Eurogamer
GamesIndustry.biz
Nintendo Life
Pure Xbox
Push Square
Time Extension
VG247
All Allies in Assassin's Creed Shadows | Monster Hunter Wilds best weapons tier list | Blox Fruits codes | Elden Ring boss locations | Best Minecraft seeds 1.21 | Past Wordle answers | The Maw
What are you looking for? Go
If you click on a link and make a purchase we may receive a small commission. Read our editorial policy.
James Archer: James had previously hung around beneath the RPS treehouse as a
freelancer, before being told to drop the pine cones and climb up to become hardware editor.
He has over a decade’s experience in testing/writing about tech and games, something you
can probably tell from his hairline.
View comments (0)
Related topics  Hardware · How To · PSUs
Rock Paper Shotgun is
better when you sign in
Sign in and join us on our journey to
discover strange and compelling PC games.
Sign in with Google
Sign in with email
Home ▶ Hardware ▶ Guides
How to install a PSU
Fit a new power supply to keep your components fed
Guide by James Archer, Hardware Editor
Published on March 9, 2023
Next: How to install a
motherboard
Prev: How to install RAM
It ain’t the most glamorous piece of the PC building puzzle, but your PSU (power supply
unit) is ultimately what brings the whole system to life. Beeping, whirring life. Let’s look
at how to install a PSU in your PC case, how to prep yourself for better cable
management once the build is complete, and how to make sure you get a PSU with
enough power for your build in the hrst place.
Watch on YouTube
If you’re following along with our How to build a PC guide, this is an ideal time to turn
your attention to both the PSU and the case at large: after installing the CPU, installing
RAM, and htting a CPU cooler to the motherboard, you’re almost ready to slap (i.e.
carefully place) the mobo into the waiting chassis. Having the PSU ready in advance of
that will let get most of the power connections, of which there are a few, out of the way
as soon as the board is in place.
Grab your screwdriver, then, and get ready to crack open your case: there’s a PSU that
needs to get comfy.
How to install a PSU
Step 1: You can skip this step if you have a 'hxed' PSU, as all the cables that feed power
to the other components will be permanently attached. For modular and semi-modular
PSUs, your hrst move is making sure that all these cases are connected to the main
power supply. Here are the essentials:
You may also need:
Double-check your other components to see which cables you’ll need, and plug them
all into the PSU. Then, remove both side panels from your PC case by loosening any
thumbscrews or latches.
Step 2: With the PSU fan-side down, slide it into the case’s PSU bay. This is usually at
the back and in the koor of the case, except for very cheap or old cases that have it at
the top.
Some cases let you remove a plate at the rear then simply slide in the PSU, which can
then be secured by re-attaching the plate. On others, as you can see in these photos,
the PSU goes in from the side, then is screwed directly onto the chassis. Either way,
secure the PSU in place with the kat-topped screws that came with the case.
Step 3: Later sections of the PC building guide will show you exactly where to plug in
each PSU cable, but you can make life easier for yourself by thinking in advance about
where these cables are going to run. That way, when the time comes to do some actual
cable management, you won’t have to unplug and replug them.
For example, the big 24-pin cable connects directly to the motherboard, usually about
halfway up the board’s right edge. See the currently empty motherboard tray? It should
have cable routing gaps running alongside the right edge, so you’ll eventually need to
run the cable behind the tray, then thread it through this routing hole into the
motherboard. The CPU power cable, meanwhile, will usually need to run up to the top-
left corner of the motherboard. Check your case: there will be another routing hole,
wouldn’t you know it, near the top-left corner of the motherboard tray. Any cables
going to graphics card can share a routing hole with the 24-pin cable, as they’ll also be
connecting to component about halfway up the case’s interior.
Obviously you can’t properly tidy these cables until they’re connected to something,
but it’s much easier to avoid messy builds and criss-crossing wires if you can visualise
beforehand when they’re going to go. Even if that means simply stuQng the cables
under the PSU shroud: you can likely do this with any SATA power cables, as the most
common positions of hard drive and 2.5in SSD mounts don’t put them within the main
chamber, unlike the motherboard and graphics card.
What PSU do I need?
Most importantly, your PSU should ht your case. The vast majority of conventional
tower-style cases have room for standard ATX power supplies, whereas compact
chassis designs may only ht an SFX-style PSU. Check your case’s specs if you’re not
sure.
Next, you’ll need enough watts on hand to ensure the components doing the heavily
lifting are suQciently fed – there’s no sense investing in the best graphics cards or best
gaming CPUs if they’re not getting enough power. For a very basic gaming PC, 450-
500W will be enough, but I’d recommend at least 650W for mid-range builds. More
advanced rigs, especially those with power-hungry GPUs like the RTX 4070 Ti, should
go for at least 750W.
You’ll also see PSU possess ratings like 80 Plus Bronze, 80 Plus Gold and 80 Plus
Platinum. These basically rate how eQciently a PSU can turn wall power into PC power.
Higher ratings (Gold, Platinum and Titanium) are therefore better for your electricity bill
and should produce less heat, at the cost of being more expensive to buy. Honestly,
Bronze-rated PSUs are hne for budget builds, but Gold is a better middle ground.
Lastly, you can take your pick of modular, semi-modular and hxed PSUs. Modular
models allow you to attach and detach every individual PSU cable from the PSU itself,
so the only cables in the case are the ones you need; hxed PSU cables can’t be
removed, so are cheaper but might stup your case with unnecessary wires. Semi-
modular PSUs have both a few hxed cables and a few sockets for removable cables. I
personally prefer semi-modular PSUs when buying them for myself, as the hxed cables
are usually the most essential ones anyway.
How To Install A PSU
1x 24-pin motherboard connector, for general power
1x 8-pin CPU power connector
1-3x PCIe power connectors, for the graphics card. Most GPUs only need 1-2
1x SATA power connector, for any hard drives, 2.5in SATA SSDs or CPU cooler power
cables you might be installing. These tend to have multiple connectors on a single
cable, so you probably only need one.
1x 4, 6 or 8-pin CPU power connector, but only if your motherboard has two CPU
power headers and you intend to perform some extreme CPU overclocks. If not, you
only need the one CPU cable listed above, even if your motherboard does have a
second header – it’s hne to leave this empty.
Here's a nice, wide routing hole between the top of the motherboard and the roof of the case.
What size gaming monitor
are you planning to get next?
2,076 votes
24" or smaller
27"
32"
34"
49" or more
Vote
Read this next
Marathon is real, looks ridiculously stylish,
has a release date, and is getting a closed alpha test this month
The ever-gorgeous The Eternal Life of Goldman is tapping some
Octopath Traveler and Final Fantasy talent for its score
Baldur's Gate 3's journey is almost at its end, as its last major update gets a release
date for next week
LATEST NEWS
Marvel Rivals Season 2 begins now with
Emma Frost, new team-ups and a PC
performance boosting mode
Maha: The Old Country release date pegged
for August by now-edited Steam blog
Tequila's lost projects include a possible
Rime follow-up, a dungeon tourguide game
and a procgen hghting sim
SpeedRunners 2 announced, triggering
painful Sonic 2 kashbacks even if it's
actually "2D Mario Kart"
Marathon players on PC won't need a
PlayStation account, say Bungie
The sequel to the sequel to Snake just
dropped
Schedule I NPCs cry for help, dealer
continues to stalk them while making
spreadsheets
LATEST GUIDES
NYT Connections hint (Sun, 13 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer today #1394 (April 13
2025)
NYT Connections hint (Sat, 12 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer #1393 (April 12
2025)
NYT Connections hint (Fri, 11 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer #1392 (April 11 2025)
NYT Connections hint (Thu, 10 Apr)
TOP DISCUSSIONS
What are we all playing this
weekend?
The Sunday Papers
Marathon is real, looks ridiculously
stylish, has a release date, and is
getting a closed alpha test this
month
Baldur's Gate 3's journey is almost at
its end, as its last major update gets
a release date for next week
Elden Ring Nightreign? The
Duskbloods? Who needs them, now
that Dark Souls' seamless co-op mod
is here
What's on your bookshelf?:
Mouthwashing's Johanna Kasurinen
The ever-gorgeous The Eternal Life of
Goldman is tapping some Octopath
Traveler and Final Fantasy talent for
its score
 299
 44
 33
 12
 5
 4
 2

