Home > Hardware > How to Install Hard Drive (HDD) in Your Desktop PC
How to Install Hard Drive (HDD) in Your Desktop PC
Beebom Staff Updated: December 18, 2023  Comments 0
If you you are building a desktop PC for the ﬁrst time or upgrading your storage space for
the better, installing a new hard drive can prove to a daunting task for some. While most
users these days install SSDs in their PCs, a hard disk drive (HDD) is still one of the most
popular storage devices for those who want high capacity at an affordable price. So
today, we will explain the process to install a hard drive in your PC in simple steps. The
process is straightforward and sees you mount the HDD, plug in the cables, and format
the drive to make it usable on your computer. We will go through these steps one-by-
one, so keep reading. Let’s learn how to install an HDD in your PC.
Table of Contents
Things to Remember Before Installing a Hard Drive
Select the Right Form Factor
Internal hard disk drives (HDDs) are designed for internal use in desktops and come in
two form factors. You can get 2.5-inch HDDs, like Seagate BarraCuda, or 3.5-inch HDDs,
like this popular WD Blue drive. The thickness varies based on which hard drive model
you buy. For a small-size ITX Build, a 2.5-inch HDD is ideal. The internal HDDs in laptops
are usually the 2.5-inch kind as well. For most people though, we recommend getting a
modern 3.5-inch HDD with a 7200rpm speed.
Note: In 2022, you should not use a hard drive as your main boot partition for Windows.
Using a modern OS such as Windows 10/11 on a hard drive tends to be an unoptimized
experience. The UI, opening apps, everything is sluggish and feel intolerable. Instead,
check out the best NVMe and SATA SSDs you can consider in 2023.
Gather the Necessary Tools
Firstly, you need a Philips Head screwdriver to install the drive in the hard disk bay. Your
workplace should be clean, and you must ground yourself before touching your PC
components. An anti-static bracelet is a great tool to avoid electrostatic damage. In this
guide, you will be needing a SATA Cable, SATA Power Connector (included with power
supply), and HDD mounting screws provided with the case.
How to Install a Hard Drive in Your Desktop PC
Step 1: Open Side Panel of Your PC Case
First, you must open up all side panels of your case and set them aside to gain access to
the motherboard. In this guide, we expect you have already installed the power supply
(PSU) and the motherboard with its various components in your PC. You will need to use
a Philips Head screwdriver for this. We will require it while mounting the hard drive in the
PC case as well.
Step 2: Locate the Hard Drive Mount
Next, locate the 3.5-inch drive mounting bay in your PC case. In many cases, including
ours, the case comes with a tool-less bay for easy installion. Depending on your case
though, the drive bay might require you to screw in the drive. Once you ﬁnd it, position
your hard drive in the bay and start to screw it in with the Philips Head screwdriver, and
the relevant drive-mounting screws provided with your PC case.
In our installation, we didn’t need any screws, and the HDD simply rests inside the 3.5-
inch drive day with nubbins that go inside the screw holes. The hard drive itself rests
ﬁrmly in place inside the dedicated drive bay of our Cooler Master ATX case.
Note: If you have a 2.5-inch HDD, simply install it in the 2.5-inch drive mount location in
your PC case in this step instead of the 3.5-inch one. The other steps in this tutorial will
remain the same.
Step 3: Plug In SATA Cable in Hard Drive
Next, plug in one end of the SATA cable to the HDD. You will notice notches on the SATA
port and the cable itself, which align in a speciﬁc orientation. Also, retrace the power
supply cables to ﬁnd the SATA power connector. Then, route the cable toward the drive
bay of your case, and plug in the SATA power connector to the hard drive.
Step 4: Plug In SATA Cable in Motherboard
Next, locate the SATA ports on your motherboard, and plug in the other end of your SATA
cable. You can refer to your motherboard manual in case you need help in ﬁnding the
port. If you have a big graphics card installed, it becomes quite hard to plug in a SATA
cable as the ports are usually positioned around the PCI-e slot area where you plug in
the GPU. So, you might need to uninstall the graphics card if needed.
You hard drive Installation is now complete. We can now move to the next section, where
we make our new storage device ready for use.
Step 5: Confirm If HDD Was Installed Correctly
Boot up your PC and enter the BIOS setup. On most motherboards, the key to enter the
BIOS is F2 or Delete. You can refer to this guide for help on how to enter the BIOS. The
POST screen, which shows up when you ﬁrst start your PC, also lists the keys you can
press to enter the BIOS.
Under Storage Information or another similar term (speciﬁc to your BIOS), you can see
your newly installed HDD. The model number and capacity should be listed here. Then,
you just need to format it in the next step, which will make it ready for storing data.
Step 6: Format Hard Disk for First-Time Use
Usually, when you install a new hard drive, Windows 10/11 asks you to format the storage
device before you use it. When you boot into the Windows OS, there will be a pop-up
that asks you to format the drive. Proceed with the formatting process, and your drive
will now show up under “My PC” in hte File Explorer.
In the rare case that you do not get the pop-up, follow these steps to make your hard
drive ready for use. Press the Windows key and type “Create and format hard disk
partitions” in the search bar at the top. Click on the utility in the search results, and you
will see your new drive at the bottom. In this case, it should show up as “Unallocated
Space.” Right-click on your drive and select the “New Volume” option. After that, follow
the steps in the wizard to format the drive. You can refer to this guide for detailed steps
on how to format a drive with the disk management utility. It also includes other
alternative methods for formatting a storage device.
That’s pretty much everything you need to know about installing a hard drive in your PC.
After following the steps mentioned in our guide, your HDD is now ready for storing data.
While there were a few things to keep in mind, and the installation mostly involved
mounting the hard drive and plugging in the cables. It wasn’t too hard, right? Now, to
manage the partitions in your HDD, check out this guide about the best partition software
to use. It has some free utilities mentioned as well. For further storage expansion, buy
one of the best external HDDs listed in this guide. And in case you have any doubts,
comment down below, and we will help you out.
FAQs
 Comments 0
Recommended Articles
Nvidia ARM Chips for Windows PCs:
Everything We Know So Far
Arjun Sha
5 Reasons Why MSI Sword 16 HX Series
Needs to Be on Your Wishlist
Partner Content
5 Best Laptops for Students from MSI (with
Discounts & Deals)
Partner Content
Beebom is one of the leading consumer technology
websites aimed at helping people understand and use
technology in a better way.
About Us Careers Get in touch Advertise Privacy Policy Editorial Guidelines
Beebom Gadgets SearchNews Opinions Reviews Gaming Tech Entertainment▾ ▾ ▾
 Share
Is it hard to install a hard drivein a PC?
Can I add another HDD to my PC?
Is HDD better than SSD for PC?
Can any HDD ﬁt in any PC?
This Lenovo Concept
Laptop Opens and Follows
You on Command
Sagnik Das Gupta
Intel Lunar Lake vs
Snapdragon X Elite: x86
Makes a Comeback
Arjun Sha
Intel Lunar Lake:
Everything You Need to
Know
Arjun Sha
Intel Core Ultra 7 155H
Benchmarks and Specs
Sagnik Das Gupta
© Beebom Media Private Limited
Beebom Staff
Bringing the latest in technology, gaming, and entertainment
is our superhero team of staff writers. They have a keen eye
for latest stories, happenings, and even memes for tech
enthusiasts.
Trending Stories in
#Hard drive
01 Google Is Trying to Recycle Hard
Drives by Reusing Its Rare Earth
Magnets
Beebom Staff
