Latest
News
Reviews
Hardware
Features
Videos
Guides
Bestest Bests
Free games
Discord
Deals
Podcasts
RSS
Supporters
Support us
Get our newsletter
Sign in / Create account
All Allies in Assassin's Creed Shadows | Monster Hunter Wilds best weapons tier list | Blox Fruits codes | Elden Ring boss locations | Best Minecraft seeds 1.21 | Past Wordle answers | The Maw
What are you looking for? Go
If you click on a link and make a purchase we may receive a small commission. Read our editorial policy.
Home ▶ Hardware ▶ Guides
How to install a CPU cooler
Fortune favours the cold
Guide by James Archer, Hardware Editor
Updated on April 21, 2023
Now that you’ve installed a CPU, the logical next step of building a PC would be to
install a CPU cooler. So, let’s do that.
These essential chip-chillers come with varying degrees of sci-V design tendencies,
ranging from simple fan-and-radiator combos – air coolers, to use their actual name –
to the mathematical pipework of "open loop" liquid coolers. For your Vrst PC build, don’t
worry about constructing an open loop system; I know this is guide is meant to inform
you, but plumbing knowledge is more than you need at this point. Instead, you can
simply pair your CPU with either a simple air cooler or a more powerful, yet still
relatively easy to install, "closed loop" all-in-one liquid cooler.
Watch on YouTube
For a detailed breakdown of how these two types compare, you can always read our
liquid cooling vs air cooling guide, but in short: air coolers are simpler, cheaper, and
e\ective enough to cool all but the hottest of hot chips at stock speeds. AIO liquid
coolers are more expensive, and have a slightly more involved installation process, but
are more e\ective at soothing temperatures on high-end and overclocked CPUs.
They’re often quieter than air coolers, too, and still aren’t anywhere near as tough to
install and maintain as open loop systems.
This guide will outline how to install both air and AIO liquid coolers, though please
forgive some hedging along the way, as di\erent manufacturers use slightly distinct
mounting systems for their coolers and trying to cover them all would be an
incomprehensible mess. I can give you broad-strokes walkthroughs, though, and if
you’re ever unsure about a speciVc detail, you can always check your cooler’s manual.
As with installing the CPU itself, installing a CPU cooler onto a motherboard is easier
when the mobo is outside the case – though AIO coolers will eventually require you to
a^x the fans and radiator to your PC’s chassis. Be sure to have your tube of thermal
paste at the ready too, and have a read of the thermal paste section below if you’re not
already familiar with how this heat transfer gloop works. Otherwise, use these links to
jump to the relevant section:
Thermal paste: how it works and how much to use
If you simply pressed the bare metal of your CPU cooler onto the processor, it wouldn’t
absorb as much heat as it needs to: tiny gaps between the two would prevent proper
conduction. Add some highly conductive thermal paste between the two, however, and
heat from the CPU has a much easier time passing through to the cooler, which
eventually dissipates it.
Sadly, thermal paste has a reputation, maybe not entirely undeserved, for being a pain
point of PC builds. Apply too little, and not enough heat will transfer from the CPU to
the cooler, causing overheating. Apply too much, and it will seep all over your
motherboard socket, while insulating the CPU rather than facilitating the thermal
transfer. Aaaaand causing overheating.
Yes, getting the thermal paste right is important, though it’s not as scientiVcally precise
a process as the horror stories make it sound. You just need to apply enough to form a
thin, even layer across the top of the CPU – think a single coat of paint. On Intel chips
that Vt in LGA 1151 or LGA 1200 sockets, that amounts to about a small pea-sized blob
of paste, while AMD’s bigger Ryzen chips need a slightly-bigger-than-pea-sized blob.
Intel LGA 1700 processors are taller than 10th and 11th Gen chips, so could also use a
tiny bit extra. Like so:
A lot of CPU coolers come with thermal paste pre-applied to the contact plate, though I
think it’s worth learning how to dab it onto the CPU yourself. Firstly, in my experience,
the amount of pre-applied paste is rarely enough to cover the whole chip, especially if
it’s a bigger model like Intel’s 12th or 13th Gen CPUs. Secondly, if you remove the cooler
for any reason – whether it’s an abortive installation attempt or upgrading in a few
years’ time – then you'll have to apply new paste anyway. Don’t ever re-use paste that’s
already been squished between the CPU and the cooler, as separating them leaves the
paste with a distressed texture that prevents you regaining the perfectly eat, airtight
layer you want.
How to install a CPU air cooler
Air coolers are perfect for beginner-level, compact, and/or low budget builds. Cooling
power won’t match a quality AIO, but will still comfortably manage the vast majority of
CPUs out there, and there are far fewer cables and components to worry about when
installing.
Step 1: Check if your cooler comes with a mounting backplate, or if it’s designed to
attach directly to a pair of retention clips around the motherboard’s CPU socket. Most
modern CPU coolers, including some stock coolers like AMD’s Wraith Stealth, use
backplates – if yours does, and your motherboard includes these retention clips, use a
screwdriver to remove them.
If your cooler does need these clips, leave them on and skip to step 3.
Step 2: Assemble the air cooler’s backplate; this is what the main cooler will hold onto
once it’s installed. The backplate will likely need to be adjusted according to the
motherboard socket type, but you should end up with four screws (or raised screw
holes) that align with the four pre-cut holes around the motherboard socket. Press the
backplate against the rear of the socket so that its protusions end up poking through to
the other side, then lay the motherboard eat.
Step 3: It’s time to apply thermal paste to the CPU, but what’s the best way of actually
doing so? Some say you should drop a dollop on the chip than use a piece of card or
plastic to spread it over the CPU, like butter on toast. Others say to draw an X pattern
with two thin lines of paste. I think, to get a consistent, fool-proof layer, you should
squeeze a blob onto the chip (see above for how big this should be, per your CPU) and
use the weight of the cooler itself to spread the paste nice and evenly. For now, just
add that blob onto the middle of your processor.
If your cooler has thermal paste pre-applied, I’d go as far as to say to wipe it o\ with a
paper towel and apply it manually. Pre-applied patches rarely cover the whole CPU, and
total coverage is ideal.
Step 4: Here’s where the installation process really diverges, depending on the cooler.
Some coolers have four spring screws that go directly into the screw holes on the
backplate; others may have metal loops that hook onto the aforementioned retention
clips. For both of these types, just line them up, carefully push down on the cooler so
that it spreads the thermal paste out from the centre, then secure it to the respective
mounting mechanism. If your cooler has the four screws, turn them only partially, one
at a time, repeating until they’re all fully tight – this makes sure pressure is applied to
the thermal paste more evenly.
For other coolers, you may need to screw a set of stando\s onto the backplate’s
protusions Vrst, as shown in these pictures, then possibly install a pair of mounting
risers on top of those. Just follow the manual if you’re not sure, but eventually you
should have a means to a^x the cooler to the motherboard. Again, bring it down level
onto the thermal paste, and tighten any fastening screws at an even rate. If you Vnd
the cooler’s fan is in the way of any screws, you should be able to unclip it from the
radiator, to clip back on later once you’re done. Remember to keep the fan oriented so
that it blows towards the left side of the motherboard – this will help make sure the hot
air wafts towards the rear of your eventual PC, where it can be pumped out by an
exhaust fan.
Step 5: By this point you should have a fully mounted CPU cooler with, presumably, a
suitably spread-out layer of paste between it and the CPU. All that’s left to do is
connect the fan to the motherboard, so grab the fan’s cable and plug it into the 4-pin
CPU_FAN header on the mobo. This is usually found along the board's top edge, or next
to the CPU socket further down.
How to install a CPU liquid cooler
Liquid coolers (also called watercoolers) are a high-performing yet relatively
convenient middle ground between simple air coolers and complex open-loop cooling
setups. There are no pipes to hand-cut here, nor coolant reservoirs to Vnd room for:
just a pump, connected by two eexible tubes to a radiator, and one to three fans.
Nevertheless, installing an AIO liquid cooler is still somewhat more involved than
mounting an air cooler. In fact, you should probably keep this tab open, because the
whole setup process takes place both before and after you install the motherboard
inside your PC case.
Step 1: Check whether your cooler uses a backplate to mount the pump, or if it’s for an
AMD socket, whether it uses the motherboard’s retention clips. If it uses a backplate,
assemble it per the included instructions, and remove the retention clips with a
screwdriver. Intel motherboards don’t have these clips, so just assemble the backplate
if you’re doing an Intel-based build.
Remember: the screw holes on the corners of the backplate should line up with the
four empty holes on the motherboard, surrounding the CPU socket. Get these aligned,
seat the screw receptacles in the mobo holes, avoiding any obvious dirty jokes, and lay
the motherboard eat.
Step 2: Fit the included mounting bracket to the cooler’s pump, if the correct one isn’t
installed already. You’ll likely have multiple brackets in the box for various Intel and AMD
sockets, so Vnd the appropriate one and secure it to the pump. Again, the exact
technique for this will vary by model, but you’ll likely need to either twist the bracket
into place or – if it’s split into two parts – push them into locking slots on either side of
the pump.
Step 3: Apply your thermal paste. Similarly to air coolers, I’d argue the best way of
doing this is to squeeze a pea to slightly-bigger-than-a-pea sized blob in the middle of
the CPU, so when you secure the pump in place, it smushes the paste evenly over the
top of the chip.
Step 4: Coolers that use AMD’s retention clip system can, at this point, latch onto those
clips immediately, with just a thumbscrews needing tightening to get the pump fully
secured in place.
Other coolers will need a touch more assembly of the mounting system, usually
involving four stando\s attaching to the backplate. SpeciVcally, the bits poking
through those four holes. From here you Vt the pump over the CPU with thumbscrews,
or install a set of risers and screw the pump onto that instead. Either way, make sure to
keep the pump level when you’re pressing it down onto the thermal paste, and tighten
any screws gradually so that you’re applying even pressure underneath. If you fully
tighten a screw in one corner and leave the opposite corner completely loose, the paste
won’t spread as well as it could, and that’s poor paste practice.
Step 5: There should be a 3-pin cable coming out of the pump; grab this and connect it
to the CPU_OPT header on your motherboard, or if it has one, the AIO_PUMP head
instead. Don’t worry about plugging a 3-pin connector into a 4-pin header; the latter
will have plastic Vns showing you which three of the four pins to connect to.
Now, here’s where you can put the cooler installation on hold for a while. You should
have the pump securely attached to the CPU and motherboard – nice one, if so – but
the radiator and fans will still be loose. We want to attach these to both each other and
the PC case, but it makes more sense to do that once the motherboard is inside the
case as well. And we don’t want that just yet, as we can still do some component
installations on the board outside the case, like installing the RAM. So, leave this page
open, and see you momentarily…
Step 6: Hello again. By now your motherboard and PSU should both be installed in your
case, meaning everything is in place to continue installing your liquid cooler. The Vrst
order of business is marrying the chassis with both the fan(s) and the radiator.
How you go about this will depend on where exactly in the case you’re mounting
everything. Keep in mind, the fans need to cool the radiator by either blowing cold air
onto it, or blowing heat away from it like an exhaust. Therefore, if you want to Vt them
near the front of the case, where cold air will be rushing in, you’ll want position the fans
between the chassis and the radiator, oriented to suck air from the front and blow it
backwards across the fan. If you’re positioning the radiator near the back of the case,
it’s better to position the radiator between the fans and the case. This will ensure the
fans push hot air from the radiator out of the case’s vents. Not sure which direction the
fans will push/pull air? Look on their sides for a little arrow, which indicates aireow
direction.
It's sometimes a little easier to install AIO coolers with the fans acting as exhausts, as
you can use the included long screws to secure the fans onto the radiator while they’re
both outside the case. Then, move the radiator into its mounting position on the case,
and use the smaller screws and washers to secure it to the case.
If you’re using the fans as intakes, you’ll need to use the long screws to secure the fans
and the radiator to the chassis all at the same time. Make sure all screw holes are
aligned Vrst, then use one hand to hold the radiator, fans and case together – like an
unappetizing metal and plastic sandwich. Then, with you other hand, thread the Vrst
screw through the chassis, through the fan, and into the radiator. Tighten it up with a
screwdriver and you’ll have a much easier time with the rest of the screws.
If you’re lucky, your case might have detachable fan/radiator mounting brackets, like
the one in the photo above. These aren’t necessary (obviously, given how I’ve just
described how to install an AIO cooler without them) but the fact that they let you do
the more di^cult screwdriver work outside the case, before reattaching everything at
once with just one or two thumbscrews, is a deVnite bonus.
Step 7: I know that was a long step, but we’re almost done. You just need to connect
the cooler’s remaining cables, chieey the fan connector(s). At least one of these should
always go into the CPU_FAN header on the motherboard, and if you have multiple fans,
it’s best if you can use a splitter to connect them all to this same header. If your cooler
didn’t include a splitter, the SYS_FAN headers will work as well, though CPU_FAN will
always need an active connection for your PC to boot.
Many AIO liquid coolers also have a few other cables, to enable features like RGB
lighting or customizable pump displays. Go through these one by one and make sure
they’re all connected, safe in the knowledge that it’s practically impossible to connect
them to the wrong socket: SATA power cables, for instance, can only connect to the
SATA power connectors of the PSU. Some coolers may also need to connect to a USB2
header on the motherboard (these headers are usually along the bottom edge of the
board), or to 12V/5V RGB headers (bottom edge or right edge, usually).
How To Install A CPU Cooler
How to install a CPU air cooler
How to install a CPU liquid cooler
How often do you upgrade your gaming TV? 2,445 votes
Every two years
Every three years
Every Vve years
Every 10 years
When it breaks
Vote
Image credit: Rock Paper Shotgun

© 2025 Rock Paper Shotgun, an IGN Entertainment, Inc. brand. 18 Mansell Street Level 3, London, E1 8AA, United Kingdom. All rights reserved. No part of this website or its
content may be reproduced without the copyright owner's permission. Rock Paper Shotgun is a registered trademark of Gamer Network Limited, an a^liate of IGN
Entertainment, Inc.
Helpful Links
About Us
Advertise with us
Archive
Authors
Contact Us
Corporate Site
Interactive Maps
Newsletters
RSS Feeds
Policies
Accessibility Policy
AdChoices
Code of Conduct
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Editorial Policy
Privacy Policy
Review Policy
Terms & Conditions
Gamer Network
Dicebreaker
Digital Foundry
Eurogamer
GamesIndustry.biz
Nintendo Life
Pure Xbox
Push Square
Time Extension
VG247
James Archer: James had previously hung around beneath the RPS treehouse as a
freelancer, before being told to drop the pine cones and climb up to become hardware editor.
He has over a decade’s experience in testing/writing about tech and games, something you
can probably tell from his hairline.
View comments (0)
Related topics  CPU · CPU coolers · Hardware · How To
Rock Paper Shotgun is
better when you sign in
Sign in and join us on our journey to
discover strange and compelling PC games.
Sign in with Google
Sign in with email
Next: How to install RAM
Prev: How to install a CPU
A quick guide to CPU temperature monitors
Assuming you followed this guide – and feel free to imagine me looming over you like
an embittered headmaster upon you reading that – there should be no reason for your
processor to run at anything other than healthy temperatures.
If you just want to check your CPU temps, though, there are a few di\erent monitoring
tools you can install once your Vnished PC is up and running. Core Temp, for example, is
a convenient, simple, lightweight monitor that shows the current temperatures of
every individual CPU core at once.
For more detailed, wider-ranging insight into your PC parts, HWMonitor is a good
alternative. It’s a one-stop shop for all the monitoring data a budding PC nerd could
want: not just CPU core temperatures, but voltages, current clock speeds, fan speeds,
SSD temperatures, graphics cards temperatures and power usage, and much more
besides. It’s especially useful if you ever decide to get into manual overclocking.
These two are mainly for desktop usage, so for keeping an eye on temperatures while
you’re running games, try MSI Afterburner. It takes a little manual setup, but CPU
temperature is one of many metrics you can set to display on an in-game overlay.
Afterburner is stu\ed with other useful gubbins, like overclocking tools and a
benchmarking feature, so is nice to have in any event – though its future, in terms of
continuing updates, is uncertain.
Read this next
Baldur's Gate 3's journey is almost at its end, as its last major update
gets a release date for next week
Marvel Rivals Season 2 begins now with Emma Frost, new team-ups
and a PC performance boosting mode
MaVa: The Old Country release date pegged for August by now-edited Steam blog
LATEST NEWS
SpeedRunners 2 announced, triggering
painful Sonic 2 eashbacks even if it's
actually "2D Mario Kart"
The sequel to the sequel to Snake just
dropped
Schedule I NPCs cry for help, dealer
continues to stalk them while making
spreadsheets
Moonlighter 2: The Endless Vault gets a
summer release window, which is precise
enough to get me excited
Barotrauma devs' next game is Frostrail, an
icy cosmic horror co-op shooter where you
get your very own train
Vampire Survivors' latest crossover is with,
uh, Square Enix's SaGa series as part of a
free update
It is time to go to the Arctic and decide
which of you is the dog
LATEST GUIDES
NYT Connections hint (Sat, 12 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer today #1393 (April 12
2025)
NYT Connections hint (Fri, 11 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer #1392 (April 11 2025)
NYT Connections hint (Thu, 10 Apr)
Wordle hint and answer #1391 (April 10 2025)
Roblox: Azure Latch codes April 2025
TOP DISCUSSIONS
What are we all playing this
weekend?
Marathon players on PC won't need a
PlayStation account, say Bungie
Marvel Rivals Season 2 begins now
with Emma Frost, new team-ups and
a PC performance boosting mode
The Vrst look at Enshrouded's next
update promises a "rebirth" of that
titular shroud
Tequila's lost projects include a
possible Rime follow-up, a dungeon
tourguide game and a procgen
Vghting sim
James and Nic kick a thing: Sloclap's
Rematch edition
X4: Foundations, the space sim that
lets you take an empire to war, will let
you just talk things out in its next
update
 199
 26
 9
 7
 6
 5
 5

