TRENDING Tariff Wars Switch 2 AMD RDNA 4 Nvidia Blackwell Where to Buy RX 9070
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
  SEE ALL COMMENTS (2)
Matt
Safford
After a rough start with the Mattel Aquarius as a child, Matt built his first PC in
the late 1990s and ventured into mild PC modding in the early 2000s. He’s
spent the last 15 years covering emerging technology for Smithsonian, Popular
Science, and Consumer Reports, while testing components and PCs for
Computer Shopper, PCMag and Digital Trends.
READ MORE
How to Apply Thermal Paste to Your CPU
How to Check Your PC's CPU Temperature
CPU Benchmarks and Hierarchy 2025: CPU Rankings
The Best CPU for Gaming in 2025
Best CPUs for Workstations 2025
AM5 copper guard stops you from making a mess on your Ryzen CPU —
also improves heat dissipation
LATEST IN CPUS
Intel's performance-enhancing IPO program debuts in gaming PCs across
China — overclocked performance with full warranty
Chinese project aims to run RISC-V code on AMD Zen processors
Intel CEO Lip-Bu Tan has invested in 600 Chinese firms, some linked to
the Chinese military
AMD quietly announces Ryzen 8000HX series — Dragon Range Refresh
arrives to replace AMD's top laptop CPUs
AMD Zen 5 CPUs also affected by microcode vulnerability — Granite
Ridge, Turin, Ryzen AI 300, and Fire Range at risk
Intel enforces strict tariff compliance for steel and aluminum shipments
amid new U.S. tariffs
LATEST IN HOW-TO
PC components  >  CPUs
How to Install a CPU
How-to By Matt Safford published 6 July 2023
Make sure you line up those corner arrows!
    Comments (2)
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it
works.
Your system's CPU or processor may be powerful enough to keep your games
running smoothly and chew through productivity tasks with ease, but it (and the
CPU socket that it drops into on the motherboard) are surprisingly easy to
damage if you aren't careful and don't know what you're doing. 
So whether you're building your first PC, upgrading an existing system, or you're
a DIY veteran confused by recent socket changes, it's essential that you handle
your processor with care and install your CPU correctly in the motherboard
socket. If it's clamped into the socket wrong, you can damage the CPU, your
motherboard, and even other components if you power the system up with the
CPU installed incorrectly.
The good news is, aside from general patience and care, there are only a couple
of key steps to keep in mind. Follow our instructions below for a simple,
successful CPU install.
Be careful with the pins!
Intel's LGA 1700 socket (Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Older AMD AM4 processors use a Pin Grid Array (PGA) with hundreds of tiny pins
on the bottom of the chip. Newer AM5 CPUs and all of Intel's consumer CPUs are
the Land Grid Array (LGA) type, with pads on the bottom of the CPU and the pins
in the socket. Whichever you're using, you need to take care not to bend the pins
by dropping or banging the CPU or socket.
Bent pins can be extremely difficult to recover from – especially if it's more than
just one or two near the edge. These pins and pads are where the CPU and
motherboard meet to exchange data and power, so even one broken or bent pin
can keep your system from booting or disable some important feature like USB.
Keep your CPU in its plastic or cardboard tray until the minute you're ready to
install your CPU. And don't drop it!
YOU MAY LIKE
How to Apply Thermal Paste to Your CPU
How to Check Your PC's CPU Temperature
Prep your motherboard
A good way to start the CPU installation process is to place the motherboard on top of its box.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
You can wait until your motherboard is screwed into your case to install your
CPU, but it's generally easier and safer to do so with the motherboard still
outside your case. This isn't the easiest option, though, if you're upgrading a CPU
in an existing desktop.
If you're building a new PC, first place the board on top of the anti-static bag that
it came in and/or on top of the motherboard box to give the bottom of the board
and your table or desk some protection from each other.
Open the socket
Intel's LGA 1700 Socket closed (Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Next, you'll need to open the socket. For the most recent Intel and AMD
platforms, that's done by pushing down on the metal lever on the right side and
moving it slightly away from the socket. You'll need to move the lever out from
under the piece of metal holding it down, and slowly lift the bar all the way up
and away from the socket. On older AMD AM4 motherboards, the bar is smaller,
held down by a plastic clip, and has less resistance. But the bar-lifting process is
similar.
On Intel and current AMD boards, you'll then need to lift the silver metal CPU
retention plate up and away from the socket, the same way you lifted the metal
bar but on the opposite end of the socket. Note that, if your motherboard is
brand-new, there should be a plastic piece in the center of the retention plate,
designed to protect the socket. You can pop this out now or leave it in until you
actually install the CPU, when it will be forced out by the CPU. Hang onto this
protective cover if you think there's a chance you might want to store, sell, or
give away the motherboard at some later date because it's important to protect
those socket pins.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
AMD's AM5 socket fully open
The retention plate and the bar should now be past vertical, allowing the socket
to remain open for the next step of placing the CPU in its new home.
Line up the triangle arrows
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Don't mess this bit up unless you want to destroy your components! Before
grabbing your CPU, look on the socket or the retention plate for a small triangle /
arrow in one of the corners. Usually, it's in the upper left (image below, AMD) or
lower left (Intel). Once you've located the arrow indicator for the socket, check
your CPU for a matching arrow in one of its corners. 
You need to make sure the triangular arrow on your CPU (see image of the AMD
CPU, above) lines up in the same corner as the same arrow on your CPU socket
or retention plate. If you clamp your CPU down with these arrows misaligned,
you will damage your motherboard, likely your CPU, and possibly other
components if you power the system up with the CPU installed this way.
Gently place your CPU in its socket
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
AMD's Ryzen 9 7950X gets lowered into the AM5 socket
Now that you know where your arrows are, it's time to put the CPU in the socket.
Gently place the chip in the center of the socket, lining up the bottom edge of
the CPU with the bottom edge of the socket. Check one last time that, like in the
image above, the arrow on your CPU aligns with the arrow on your socket or
retention bracket. Then, gently lower the top edge of the CPU into the socket.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
With the CPU correctly sitting on top of the socket, nothing should look askew
With modern CPUs, the chip doesn't click or snap into place. You just need to
look and make sure that it's properly seated, fully sitting inside the plastic frame
that runs around the edge of the socket itself. If anything looks crooked or one
edge or corner sticks out in a way that the others don't, then the CPU isn't
seated properly. If that's the case, gently lift up the CPU and re-seat it in the
socket until everything looks straight and the CPU is perfectly centered in the
middle of the socket.
Locking the CPU in the socket
With your chip in its proper place, it's time to reverse a couple of the previous
steps above. But first, check one last time that your CPU and socket arrows are
aligned. Because if they aren't, you're about to destroy some expensive
hardware.
With that last check done, now lower the metal retention bracket back down, on
top of the CPU.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Lower the retention bracket back down first, before lowering the the arm
that locks it into place.
Next, it's time to lower the metal lever / retention bar again. Do this slowly,
making sure that the metal lip sticking out of the retention bracket is under the
raised section at the beginning of the bar, at the bottom or top of the socket
(depending on if it's an Intel or AMD board).
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
You'll have to press firmly to get the bar back under the metal clip that holds
it in place.
As you slowly press the bar back down, you'll notice increasing resistance,
especially with an Intel motherboard / CPU. This is normal, as pressure is needed
to press and hold all those pads against all those pins. So long as you followed
the above steps closely, aligning the arrows and making sure the CPU was
seated in the center of the socket, there's nothing to worry about.
Press the retention lever/bar down firmly until it's parallel to the motherboard,
and slip it under the metal piece on the socket that holds it down (shown to the
left of the finger in the image above).
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
With the arrows aligned, the CPU in its socket and the retention plage and bar
back in place holding things in place, the processor install process is
complete.
Congratulations! Your CPU is now installed in its socket and it's time to add
thermal paste and your cooler of choice, both of which we'll cover in other how-
tos soon. Or you can see our full guide on how to build a PC. 





Stay On the Cutting Edge: Get the Tom's
Hardware Newsletter
Get Tom's Hardware's best news and in-depth reviews, straight to your
inbox.
Your Email Address
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
SIGN ME UP
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy
and are aged 16 or over.





SEE MORE CPUS HOW TO 
RSS SearchUK Edition
 Reviews Best Picks Raspberry Pi CPUs GPUs News Coupons More  Forums
The Best OctoPrint Plugins
How to use the Warp AI-enabled terminal for Windows or Linux
6 Best Online Slicers to Try — 3D Slice on the Cloud
How to Zoom in and Out in Windows 11 or 10
How to Restart Windows Explorer in Windows 11
How to fix Salmon Skin Problems in 3D Prints
Tom's Hardware is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.
Terms and conditions Contact Future's experts Privacy policy Cookies policy
Accessibility Statement Advertise with us About Us Coupons
Careers GDPR consent
© Future Publishing Limited Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration number
2008885.
