HOT TOPICS Best laptops Best VPN Best antivirus Best SSDs Best monitors Laptop deals Desktop PC deals Newsletters
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn't aﬀect our editorial independence.
PCWorld helps you navigate the PC ecosystem to ﬁnd the products you want and the
advice you need to get the job done.
POLICIES
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Copyright Notice
European Privacy Settings
Member Preferences
Editorial independence
Licensing & Eprints
California: Do not Sell my Personal Info
ABOUT
About Us
Advertise
Ad Choice
Contact Us
Foundry Careers
GamePro
Smart Answers
PCWORLD CATEGORIES
Business
Laptop
Mobile
PC Hardware
Storage
Deals
TechHive
SUBSCRIBE
Digital Magazine - Subscribe
Digital Magazine - Info
Gift Subscription
Newsletters
Copyright © 2025 IDG Communications, Inc. Explore the Foundry Network + Privacy Settings
Home / How-To / PCs & Components How-To
HOW-TO
How to install a hard drive in your
computerDon't be afraid of cracking open your desktop PC's case. Installing a new hard drive is a basic task
anyone can accomplish.
By Brad Chacos and Marco Chiappetta
APR 5, 2021 8:43 AM PDT
Image: Marco Chiappetta/IDG
How to set up new SSDs/HDDs
in Windows? Simple. Use EaseUS
Partition Master, powered by AI,
to initialize the hard drive
without eﬀort. Except for it, it
helps to create, resize, format,
and extend partitions to any size
or convert partition/disk into a selected format like MBR or GPT . So,
the best disk management tool, totally FREE, is handy for you.
Free Download
Installing an internal hard drive is one of the more
straightforward upgrades out there—and  is often a better option than
using external drives that may be dropped or misplaced. 
The process usually requires no more than mounting it, connecting a
couple of cables, and formatting the drive for use. Still, there are a few
things you should know to make installation as smooth as possible. 
Installing a hard drive in your PC doesn’t necessarily follow the same
procedure as installing an SSD. If you’ve opted for a solid-state drive, be
sure to check out our companion guides explaining how to install an SSD
in a desktop and a laptop. SSDs tend to oﬀer much faster speeds than
hard drives, but hard drives oﬀer signiﬁcantly more capacity at lower
prices.
PROMOTION
EaseUS Partition Master Free – Install new SSDs/HHDs in one
click
LEARN  MORE
Before we dive into the nitty-gritty details, if you’re looking for a hard
drive to install in your computer, these are some highly regarded options.
All three spin at 7 ,200 revolutions per minute (RPM), the fastest speed
available in consumer hard drives.
Seagate BarraCuda: 2TB for $55, 4TB for $90, 8TB for $140, more
sizes available.
Toshiba X300: 4TB for $95, more sizes available
WD Black: 1TB for $70, 2TB for $100, 8TB for $250, more sizes
available.
Now let’ s get this hard drive installed in your computer.
Drive cages, bays, and mounting options
Internal 3.5-inch hard disk drives are typically mounted in a drive cage or
in an available drive bay. Placement and orientation of the cages or bays
will vary from case to case. The most common location is at the lower
front, near the intake fans and away from other components. Drive
cages/bays will most often be mounted perpendicular to the bottom of
the chassis, while drives mounted in the cages usually sit parallel to the
bottom of the case.
In mainstream cases, drive connectors will typically point to the rear. In
enthusiast-class cases, it’ s becoming more common to see the drive’ s
connectors facing the right side, making it easier to route and hide cables
behind the motherboard tray. Some enthusiast-class also cases give users
the ability to remove drive cages or to mount them in diﬀerent positions
to optimize air ﬂow and simplify cable management.
Mounting your hard drive
Physically mounting the hard drive in a PC is probably the most diﬃcult
part of the installation process.
Securing the drive to a cage usually requires four screws on the sides or
bottom of the drive. Many cases—especially  enthusiast cases—use  tool-
less trays that hold the drives with simple pins and clips.
Using screws is the more robust mounting method, but tool-less trays are
ﬁne for systems that won’t be moved around much.
Drives last longer when they stay nice and cool. When mounting drives in
a system, try to leave as much space between them as possible to
maximize airﬂow over the tops and bottoms. Positioning the drives
directly in front of an intake fan also helps.
Connect the hard drives with SATA
Once the drive is mounted, connecting it to your system is quick and
easy.
Virtually all new desktop hard drives sold today use the SATA interface
(unless you’re dealing with servers). SATA uses simple cables that are
keyed to ﬁt on the drive and motherboard connector one way.
Connect one end of the SATA cable to the drive, and the other end to an
available SATA port on your motherboard, and you’re halfway there.
You may ﬁnd the SATA cables included with your new drive or
motherboard feature diﬀerent connectors: straight ends or right-angle (L-
shaped). Some may have metal retention clips, while others do not. The
shape of the connector makes no diﬀerence in performance.
I like to use SATA cables with right-angle connectors on the drive side,
provided there is adequate clearance between any drives in the system.
Using right-angle connectors on the motherboard side will will result in
blocked ports, because the connector may overlap adjacent ports.
Try to ﬁnd SATA cables with metal retention clips, because they help keep
the connectors secured. Most SATA 3 (6-gigabit)-compliant cables will
usually come with the clips.
When you’re done connecting the SATA cable, you’ll have to connect the
drive to your power supply unit (PSU). The  SATA power cable from your
PSU, like the SATA data cable, is keyed to ﬁt onto the drive one-way. As
long as you don’t force it, there’ s really no way to mess it up.
Prepare the hard drive for use
Once you’ve mounted and connected the drive, power up your system
and enter the BIOS/UEFI. You can usually access the BIOS/UEFI by
pressing the DEL or F2 keys right after powering up the system. Usually,
your system will display a message along the lines of “Press DEL to enter
Setup.” Consult your motherboard’ s manual for the correct key.
In the BIOS, go to the standard System Settings menu or the Integrated
Peripherals > SATA menu to see all of the drives installed in the system. If
all of your drive controllers are enabled and the drive is properly
connected (and functional), it should be listed in the BIOS. 
If the drive isn’t listed, shut down your PC. Double-check all of the
connections, boot into the BIOS and check again. If the drive still isn’t
showing up and all the connections are secure, try plugging the SATA
data cable into a diﬀerent port on the motherboard.
To conﬁrm that Windows recognizes the drive, open up Device Manager.
In Windows 10, right-click the Windows button on your desktop and
select Device Manager. Check for the drive in the Disk Drives section. 
When you boot into Windows after installing the drive, you may see the
New Hardware Found wizard pop up if the drive is detected. The last
thing you need to do is partition and format the drive.
And with that, the drive should be available for use. If you split the drive
up into multiple partitions, you should see several drives appear in File
Explorer, each with its own drive letter and label.
Screws are the best way to secure your hard drive into your case’ s drive cage. Magnet-
tipped screw drivers can help keep you from dropping screws in diﬃcult-to-reach
places.
Some cases come with tool-less brackets that make mounting hard drives really easy.
However, these brackets are often less secure than traditional screws.
This hard drive is ﬂipped upside-down to show its parts. Seven of the 10 screw holes are
circled in red, while SATA power and data connections are circled in blue and green,
respectively.
Some SATA data cables come with L-shaped ends, which can help keep cables tidy.
The SATA power cable connection looks similar to the data cable, but is longer. The
connector is keyed to ﬁt only one way.
The UEFI BIOS will show all hard drives that are connected correctly and detected by the
system. BIOS and UEFI interfaces can diﬀer based on the motherboard make and model,
so check your motherboard manual or manufacturer website for details.
NEWS  BEST PICKS  REVIEWS  HOW-TO  DEALS LAPTOPS WINDOWS SECURITY TECHHIVE  MORE
