English
GUIDES & ARTICLES SOFTWARE BUILD SHOWCASE
BLOG
How to Upgrade & Install RAM in your PC
Last updated: November 11, 2024
As time goes by and your needs change, upgrading your PC's RAM is a great option .
Installing RAM is both one of the simplest steps while assembling a PC and is one of the easiest ways to
upgrade one too. With nearly all cases you don't have to worry about cables, as long as your RAM module is
compatible with your motherboard's slots, all you have to do is to either change the existing RAM stick or to
install additional ones.
However, there are several different options, and for each there are key points to check prior. This guide has
been created to help you make sure that you pick RAM that is compatible with your motherboard or laptop.
How To Upgrade RAM On Your Desktop PC
You must ﬁnd the answers the following questions ﬁrst:
What is the motherboard model?
Which CPU is installed on your motherboard?
How much RAM is supported by your motherboard/processor combination?
What type of memory does your motherboard support?
Do you have free memory slots on your motherboard?
If you have a large air cooler for your CPU, make a note of the RAM height clearance before choosing the
memory.
Which memory modules are currently installed? Determine the type, quantity, capacity, frequency,
latency and brand.
For the ﬁnal point, we've included two examples below:
DIMM, DDR5, 16GB, 6000MHz, CL30, CORSAIR
DIMM, DDR4, 8GB, 3200MHz, CL16, CORSAIR
We've also written a dedicated article to help you decode the CORSAIR part number yourself.
Once you have the answers to all the questions, you are presented with two options: replace the RAM
modules that are already installed, or install additional RAM modules.
Although the ﬁrst option is more costly, it is the only way to guarantee compatibility between the RAM
modules as for CORSAIR these are speciﬁcally tested to work together.
The second option allows you to upgrade at a lower cost, but there is a risk of incompatibility between the kit
already in your machine and the new one you intend to add. This is especially important for when you use
memory modules with a higher frequency than certiﬁed by the CPU manufacturer.
How to Install RAM
Step 1: Locate the RAM slots on your motherboard - they're usually next to the CPU. The number of slots
available varies between two and eight, with four being the most common. However, you can't just put your
RAM in any slot. Each slot is numbered, and you must install your RAM in the following order A1, B1, A2, B2
(Red Square). You can ﬁnd the slot numbers in your motherboard manual or on the motherboard itself.
Note : that slots A1 and B1 usually work together, as do A2 and B2, and that they are often arranged as
follows A1 - A2 - B1 - B2. If this is confusing, concentrate on ﬁnding the ﬁrst slot. If you're using a dual-
channel kit, you'll be able to identify the second one later, either by the number or the color of the slots.
Once you've identiﬁed the slots, open the small plastic clips ( Orange Square) by pushing them outwards.
Step 2: Align the small notch on your RAM with the notch on the slot. The notches on DDR3, DDR4, and
DDR5 are positioned differently, so if you bought the wrong one, you'll know as it won't ﬁt.
Step 3: Insert the stick downwards and press ﬁrmly on its edges until you feel and sometimes hear a click.
The clips on both sides should sit correctly to hold the RAM stick in place. Repeat with the other RAM sticks,
following the slot numbers accordingly.
How To Upgrade RAM For Your Laptop
As with upgrading the RAM in a PC, you must consider a few things ﬁrst.
Which is the exact brand and model of your laptop?
How much memory does your laptop model support?
Which RAM format does your laptop use? (SODIMM is the most common format)
Does your laptop have an empty slot available, or do you have to replace existing RAM?
There are laptop models that have memory soldered onto the motherboard only and do not have
additional slots to expand RAM. If this is the case, it is not possible to increase the memory capacity.
Which module(s) are present? Determine the type, quantity, and frequency of the module(s)
Once you've successfully found the answer to the above questions, it's time to choose the memory. If you
don't have a free slot available, you will have to replace the existing module(s). In this case, it is advisable to
choose the same frequency and key speciﬁcations of the already installed modules but with a higher
capacity that is compatible. Do not exceed the maximum memory supported, as this can lead to for example
your laptop not booting at all.
If you have a free slot, you'll need to choose a module with the same type, capacity, and frequency as the
one already installed, and the same goes for soldered memory.
How To Install SODIMM RAM
Step 1: Locate the memory slots, which are generally in a horizontal position, unlike standard DIMM slots
which are vertically mounted. If your PC has more than one memory slot, start with the bottom one. Take a
SO-DIMM RAM memory module and align the notch with the slot.
Step 2: Insert the RAM into the slot until the connectors are fully seated. It may appear to be at an odd
angle, but don't worry, it won't bend.
Step 3: Gently but ﬁrmly push the RAM in until the small metal pins on each side snap into place. Repeat
this with the other bars, and if you ever want to remove them, pull on the metal pins until they release. Then
simply remove the RAM from the slot.
If you ever need to remove your RAM, simply press the clips on each side to release the RAM, then pull the
RAM stick out of the slot.
PRODUCTS IN ARTICLE
VENGEANCE DDR5
SODIMM 32GB (1x32GB)
DDR5 4800MT/s (PC5-
38400) CL40 1.1V LEARN MORE
 BUY NOW
VENGEANCE® Series
64GB (2 x 32GB) DDR4
SODIMM 2666MHz CL18
Memory Kit LEARN MORE
 BUY NOW
VENGEANCE RGB PRO SL
16GB (2x8GB) DDR4
DRAM 3600MHz C18
Memory Kit – White LEARN MORE
 BUY NOW
RELATED CONTENT
BLOG
WHAT PLATFORMS
SUPPORT ECC MEMORY?
HOW TO
IS DDR5 WORTH IT?
HOW TO
DDR4 VS DDR5 RAM:
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
HOW TO
IS DDR5 BACKWARDS
COMPATIBLE?
HOW TO
IS DDR5 GOOD FOR
GAMING?
HOW TO
IS 32GB OF RAM
OVERKILL?
Get special offers, exclusive product news, and event info
straight to your inbox.
Enter your email SIGN UP
SHOP
New Products
Special Offers
Corsair.com Exclusives
Where to buy
Certiﬁed Refurbished
Business Solutions
EXPLORE
PC Builder
CORSAIR Innovation
Design Your Loop
Best Gaming Accessories
Intel 14th Generation Upgrades
AMD AM5 Upgrades
DDR5 Memory
Ambassadors
CORSAIR
About
Investor Relations
Supply Chain Disclosure
Careers
Social Impact
Press Room
Contact Us
Explorer
SUPPORT
Downloads
Customer Support
Warranty
Shipping/RMA/Returns
Terms of Sale
Copyright © 1996 - 2025 CORSAIR. All rights reserved.
Search
+ +
