Everything you need to know when
upgrading or replacing your PC
graphics card
If you go to play Fortnite and it looks like something from 1993, it might be time for a better graphics
card. But where exactly do you start? Don't worry, we've got you covered.
At Asurion, we provide support for all of your tech care needs—from protection to repairs and
performance boosts for your device. Here's a guide from our experts on everything you need to know
before attempting to replace or upgrade your computer’s graphics card.
Things to consider before you buy a new graphics
card
Whether you're an avid gamer or a video editor, a powerful graphics card can have a big impact on
your computer. When you start a game or movie, data is sent over from your computer's processor.
That data is passed through a graphics card and turned into what you see on screen. The better the
card, the better the visuals you'll get.
Before you look for a Phillips head screwdriver and try to replace the graphics card in your PC, here
are a few things you should consider.
Can your computer support a new graphics card?
When upgrading your PC graphics card, you could run into a common problem: an inadequate power
supply. Either your computer doesn't have enough wattage, or it doesn't have a sufficient number of
peripheral component interconnect express (PCI-e) power connectors. They will have either six or
eight pins, depending on the make and model.
Your computer's power supply should at least meet the requirements recommended by the graphics
card manufacturer. If you built your PC yourself, you should have an idea of what kind of power supply
you're working with.
If you didn't, you can open your case and look for the standard identification sticker that lists its
wattage information. While you've got that case open, take a peek at how many PCI-e power
connectors you have available as well.
You can’t work when your
computer doesn’t want to
Get it repaired fast at one of our stores. Just stop
in or make an appointment⎯we'll handle the rest.
Schedule a repair
Does your computer have enough processing power?
If your computer is on the older side, it's worth checking to see whether its processor has enough
power to handle the new graphics card. A high-end graphics card can't do much if the processor isn't
fast enough to keep up. Instead of increasing performance, it might reduce it instead.
You can find out how much RAM your PC has by opening the Start menu, typing “About your PC" into
the taskbar, and scrolling to the installed RAM information. 16 Gigabytes of RAM is the recommended
amount for playing most online games.
Check out our guide to get an idea of just how much RAM your computer needs.
Will the new graphics card fit inside your computer?
Depending on the manufacturer, some graphics cards can be significantly larger than what your PC
can hold. Before committing to a graphics card, look for the physical dimensions of a card on its
product page or on the manufacturer's website—a larger fan shroud or heatsink could mean that you
need more than one slot to accommodate your new card.
How to remove your old graphics card
Replacing your computer's graphics card may sound like an easy DIY project, but it can be difficult if
you're not familiar with the parts that make up your computer or if you don't have the right
equipment. If you don't have experience repairing electronics, we recommend you reach out to a
computer repair expert.
1. Start by powering off the PC and disconnecting the power cable from the tower. Discharge any
static by tapping the side of the PC case or wear an anti-static wrist strap. Grounding yourself
prevents your body from acting as a static electricity source, which could damage your
components.
2. Open the side panel on the PC case. Some panels have clips that are easy to unlatch, and others
have screws that need to be removed.
3. Remove any power cables connected to the graphics card. Press on the little plastic clip or latch
on the side and proceed by pulling out the PCI-e cable. Higher-end computers may have more
than one PCI-e power connector.
4. Using a screwdriver, remove the screw(s) holding the graphics card into the slot.
5. Before you can remove the graphics card, you'll have to release the PCI-e slot tabs that hold the
graphics card in place. The tabs are located underneath the graphics card, on the back side of the
PCI-e slot. Press on the protruding part of the tab to release it.
6. Now, you can remove the graphics card. If you plan to keep the old card, be sure to put it in an
antistatic bag for safe storage.
How to install your new graphics card
1. Place the card in the slot, and press down gently until it locks into place. Make sure it fits into the
slot with both sides sitting flush. When it's in correctly, the tab on the slot will hold it in place.
2. Secure the new graphics card to the slot with the screws that were removed earlier.
3. Connect the power cables to the graphics card.
4. Close the PC case.
5. Reconnect the power supply and startup the PC.
6. When the PC starts up for the first time after installing a new graphics card, it'll search for the
drivers—the files needed for communication between the graphics card and the computer's
operating system. To get the most use out of the new graphics card, opt for using the latest
drivers.
The Asurion® trademarks and logos are the property of Asurion, LLC. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Asurion is not affiliated with, sponsored by, or endorsed by any of the respective
owners of the other trademarks appearing herein.
Laptop PC Home Tech SHARE THIS ARTICLE
You may also be interested in:
How to add a monitor to your laptop 
Learn how to easily connect an external monitor to your
laptop and what to do if your computer has trouble
detecting it, plus how to use your iPad as a second
monitor.
5 hidden laptop features you should be
using now
Learn to get the most out of your PC laptop with these
hidden tricks and features.
Clean your laptop keyboard with these
simple steps
Learn how to disinfect sticky keys with these instructions
on how to safely clean your laptop keyboard.
Protection Plans
Mobile Protection
iPhone Protection
Samsung Phone Protection
Mobile Protection Features
Mobile Protection FAQs
Asurion Home+
Asurion Home+ Features
Asurion Home+ FAQs
Asurion Appliance+
Asurion Complete Protect
Repair Services
Cracked Screen Repair
Tech Repair
Tech Help
Tech Tips
Start or Track a Claim
How to File a Claim
Mobile App Center
Tech Help
Tech Service Features
Tech Expert Stories
Tech Help FAQs
Extended Warranties
Warranty Features
Warranty FAQs
TV and Home Theater
Laptop and Computer
Home Appliances
Electronics
Tablet and eReader
About Asurion
About Asurion
Leadership
Corporate Responsibility
Partnerships
Recognition and Reviews
Careers
Newsroom
Life at Asurion
Contact Asurion
Terms of Use Asurion Privacy Notice Cookie Preferences © Asurion 2025
We believe your tech should work
With Asurion, enjoy peace of mind knowing your
tech is protected with fast repairs and expert
support—from your phone to your fridge.
Learn more
Related Articles
AMAZON
What to do when Fire
Stick is not connecting to
Wi-Fi
GOOGLE
How to easily transfer
data from your old
phone to your new
Google Pixel
AMAZON
How to reset a Fire TV
Cube
Follow Us
Get the latest news and tech how-to's.
The devices we love aren’t
cheap. Protect them with
Asurion Home+.
With Asurion Home+®, you can get coverage for thousands
of eligible devices plus 24/7 live support from trusted
experts.
Learn more
Claims Get tech support Repair a device Protection plans Claims
Asurion uBreakiFix Stores My Account
1
Upgrade or replace your
PC's graphics card?
Here's how.
Upgrade/Replace graphics
card
Tackle another issue
