HOT TOPICS Best laptops Best VPN Best antivirus Best SSDs Best monitors Laptop deals Desktop PC deals Newsletters
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn't aﬀect our editorial independence.
PCWorld helps you navigate the PC ecosystem to ﬁnd the products you want and the
advice you need to get the job done.
POLICIES
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Copyright Notice
European Privacy Settings
Member Preferences
Editorial independence
Licensing & Eprints
California: Do not Sell my Personal Info
ABOUT
About Us
Advertise
Ad Choice
Contact Us
Foundry Careers
GamePro
Smart Answers
PCWORLD CATEGORIES
Business
Laptop
Mobile
PC Hardware
Storage
Deals
TechHive
SUBSCRIBE
Digital Magazine - Subscribe
Digital Magazine - Info
Gift Subscription
Newsletters
Copyright © 2025 IDG Communications, Inc. Explore the Foundry Network + Privacy Settings
Home / How-To / PCs & Components How-To
UPDATED
How to install a graphics cardFew improvements add as much punch to a PC as upgrading your graphics card. Here's how.
By Brad Chacos and Thomas Ryan
JAN 4, 2021 6:06 AM PST
Image: Brad Chacos/IDG
Few upgrades add as much punch to your PC as installing a new
graphics card. It can transform your PC from a system that chokes on
lightweight games into a monster that churns through even the most
visually punishing titles with ease.
But you need to get that new hardware up and running before you’re able
to bask in enhanced graphics glory. Here’ s how to upgrade your existing
computer with a new graphics card, from basic buying considerations to
step-by-step installation instructions.
Graphics card buying considerations
Simply deciding which graphics card you want is a complex and nuanced
discussion, as both AMD and Nvidia oﬀer choices for virtually every
budget, from sub-$200 options all the way up to the ferocious $1,500
GeForce RTX 3090.
In general, you want the graphics card that oﬀers the most bang for your
buck, though you’ll also want to consider a card’ s noise, heat, and power
consumption. While graphics card recommendations are outside the
scope of this article, PCWorld’ s massive graphics card buying guide can
help you make an informed decision no matter how much money you
have to spend.
Next make sure your computer has the proper hardware to support your
new card.
The most common problem that people run into is an inadequate power
supply: Either it can’t supply enough wattage, or it doesn’t have enough
available PCI-E power connectors. As a rule of thumb, your power supply
should at least meet the power supply requirements recommended by its
manufacturer. For example if you purchased the aforementioned GeForce
GTX 3090—a  video card that draws 350 watts—you  should have a power
supply that meets the 750W minimum suggested by Nvidia, along with a
pair of 8-pin power connectors.
Further reading: How to pick the best PC power supply
To ﬁnd out how much wattage your power supply pumps out, open your
case and look for the standard identiﬁcation sticker all power supplies
have, which lists their basic info. While you’re there you can also identify
how many 6-pin and 8-pin PCI-E connectors are available. 
Finally, is there enough room inside of your case to ﬁt your new graphics
card? Some high-end graphics card can be over a foot long, and two or
even three expansion slots wide. You can ﬁnd the physical dimensions for
a graphics on its product page or on the manufacturer’ s website.
With all of those questions resolved, it’ s time to get down to business.
Installing a graphics card
Installing a graphics card is a straightforward process that requires three
things: a new graphics card, your computer, and a Phillips-head screw
driver. Be sure to turn oﬀ your PC and unplug it from the wall before you
begin.
EXPLORE FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Can I install a graphics card on a PC with a low-power power supply?
What are the top-rated graphics cards for gaming?
How do I know if my graphics card is compatible with my PC's
motherboard?
How do I determine the right power supply for my PC?
What are the signs that my power supply is not suﬃcient  for my graphics
card?
Unless you need to remove an existing GPU, you ﬁrst need to locate the
long PCI-E x16 slot closest to the heat sink of your processor. This will
either be the ﬁrst or second expansion slot on your motherboard.
Make sure that there are no loose wires blocking your access to this slot. If
you’re replacing an existing graphics card, unplug any cables connected
to it, remove the screw from its retention bracket on the rear interior of
your PC case, and then remove the card. Most motherboards also have a
small plastic latch on the end of the PCI-E slot that locks the graphics card
in place. Make sure you toggle this latch to unlock your old graphics card
so you can remove it.
You can now install your new graphics card into the open and
unobstructed PCI-E x16 slot. Firmly insert the card into the slot, then push
down the plastic lock on the end of the PCI-E slot to hold it in place. Next,
use a screw to secure the graphic card’ s metal retention bracket to your
PC’ s case. You can reuse the same screw(s) that held the cover bracket or
your former graphics card in place.
Most gaming-level graphics cards require additional power connectors. If
yours does, make sure you connect those PCI-E power cables. Your
graphics card will not function correctly without properly supplied power.
In fact, if you don’t connect those PCI-E power cables your PC may be
unable to boot.
Wrapping up
With your graphics card secured and powered up, ﬁnish the job by
sliding your case’ s side panel back into position and plugging your
display cable into your new graphics card. Turn on your computer.
Now it’ s time to take care of the software side of upgrading your graphics
card.
If your new graphics card is the same brand as your old card, this process
is simple. Just go to the manufacturer’ s website and download the latest
driver package for you operating system. Keep in mind that graphics
drivers are quite large, generally about 500MB in size, and it make take
some time for them to download depending on the speed of your
Internet connection. Install the driver, restart your computer, and now
you’re ready to enjoy the buttery-smooth framerates your new graphics
card will no doubt deliver.
If you’re switching manufacturers (from Intel to AMD, from AMD to Nvidia,
or vice-versa), uninstall your old graphics driver and restart your computer
before installing the driver for your new graphics card. If you don’t
uninstall the old driver it may conﬂict with the new driver.
Done! That wasn’t so bad, was it? Now that your new graphics card is
installed, you’re ready to hop into the latest games with your upgraded
PC. Here are some great free ones to take for a test drive.
You’re going to need a decent power supply if you want to get your game on.
AMD’ s Radeon RX 6900 XT .
You install a graphics card into a PCI-E x16 slot on your computer’ s motherboard (the
long, black slots in this picture.)
Don’t forget to lock the latch at the end of the PCI-E slot after ﬁrmly inserting your
graphics card!
She needs more power, Captain! Your graphics card won’t run unless you’ve connected
it to your PSU.
The Sapphire Nitro+ Radeon RX 6800 XT , plugged in and powered on.
A.I. SearchAsk your own question...
NEWS  BEST PICKS  REVIEWS  HOW-TO  DEALS LAPTOPS WINDOWS SECURITY TECHHIVE  MORE
