HOT TOPICS Best laptops Best VPN Best antivirus Best SSDs Best monitors Laptop deals Desktop PC deals Newsletters
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn't aﬀect  our editorial independence.
PCWorld helps you navigate the PC ecosystem to ﬁnd the products you want and the
advice you need to get the job done.
POLICIES
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Copyright Notice
European Privacy Settings
Member Preferences
Editorial independence
Licensing & Eprints
California: Do not Sell my Personal Info
ABOUT
About Us
Advertise
Ad Choice
Contact Us
Foundry Careers
GamePro
Smart Answers
PCWORLD CATEGORIES
Business
Laptop
Mobile
PC Hardware
Storage
Deals
TechHive
SUBSCRIBE
Digital Magazine - Subscribe
Digital Magazine - Info
Gift Subscription
Newsletters
Copyright © 2025 IDG Communications, Inc. Explore the Foundry Network + Privacy Settings
Home / How-To / PCs & Components How-To
HOW-TO
How to install (or replace) a case fanYour PC needs to stay cool to keep working at its best. Here's how to install a fan for a new build, or
to replace a fan that has stopped working.
By Marco Chiappetta and Thiago Trevisan
SEP 15, 2021 8:05 AM PDT
Image: Alaina Yee / IDG
Many of the chips inside a typical PC generate a lot of heat and
require some form of active cooling to remain stable. Powerful recent
hardware like Nvidia’ s GeForce RTX 3000-series graphics cards and
AMD’ s Ryzen 5000 processors demand even more heat dissipation. 
System builders usually rely on heatsinks and fans to manage the heat
within a PC. If you’re upgrading or building a new PC—or  your PC is
overheating—you  may need to install new or additional fans. 
Here’ s how to identify when you need to replace a fan and how to do it
yourself.
Identifying faulty fans
Often, a fan will start to emit strange grinding noises or vibrations in its
last death throws. Sometimes there is no warning at all, and a fan will
silently come to a stop.
Open up the computer’ s case, turn it on, and look around with a ﬂashlight
(but try not to touch anything while the computer is on).
This exhaust fan is mounted to the back of the case to vent warm air.
Exhaust fans can also be mounted to the top of the case, while intake
fans are usually mounted on the front or sides.
In all but the lowest-power, passively cooled systems, you’ll likely ﬁnd at
least four fans: an intake fan, an exhaust fan, a CPU cooling fan, and a
power supply unit (PSU) cooling fan.
The CPU and PSU will be mounted on their respective components, but
case fans can be situated almost anywhere. It’ s common to ﬁnd intake
fans toward the bottom of a system, usually at the front, where they can
pull in the coolest air. Exhaust fans for expelling warm air are commonly
found at the back or top of a case.
If one of the fans has stopped, check to make sure it’ s connected. If the
fan is connected and still isn’t spinning, it will need to be replaced.
What you need to know before installing a
fan
The majority of cases and PCs sold today will have unused fan locations
available. Even if all your fans are working, there’ s a good chance you’ll
have room for at least one more.
If all your system’ s fans are functioning, yet the system runs hot or
unstable, you may want to add more fans. If your case can’t take any more
fans, or is getting too loud, consider liquid cooling. Our guides to setting
up your PC’ s fans for maximum system cooling and how to tell which
direction a PC fan blows can  also help with the process.
EXPLORE FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How to determine the direction of a PC fan?
How to manage cables in a small form factor PC?
What measurements are important for fan placement?
How to set up fans for positive pressure in a PC case?
How to use a laptop cooler to reduce heat?
If you need to replace a fan, make sure you ﬁnd a replacement with the
correct size, and connector.
Choosing the right fan
Cooling fans are available in a wide range of sizes and shapes (and
colors), from tiny barrel-type fans sometimes used to cool chips, to large
axial fans used in most power supplies.
The most common fan sizes fall in the 70mm to 140mm range, but fans as
large as 230mm are becoming more popular. Fans with a diameter of
120mm are typical in newer cases.
Look for one with a high air ﬂow (measured in cubic feet per minute, or
CFM) and low noise level (measured in decibels, or dBA). This information
will be on the package or on the product’ s information page.
Fans vary in size, speed, blade shape and color. Some fans even come
with built-in LED lights, others are more performance focused such as
this Noctua Chromax fan.
Larger fans can usually spin at lower speeds and still move plenty of air
without making much noise. Some manufacturers incorporate LED
lighting into their fans as well.
Maintain positive pressure
When adding fans to a system, maintaining positive pressure within the
case can prevent dust from being sucked into any open holes or crevices.
To maintain positive pressure, you need to have a higher combined CFM
for the intake fans than the exhaust fans.
Note: Most fans have small arrows embossed on their frames that
show the direction of air ﬂow. When mounting, point the arrow
towards the inside of the computer for intake, and the arrow towards
the outside for exhaust.
Power connections
Most cooling fans will connect to a PC with a standard connector of some
sort. Modern systems will typically use 3-pin or 4-pin dedicated fan
headers, though standard MOLEX 4-pin peripheral connectors are also
used.
From left to right: A 3-pin connector, a 4-pin connector and a MOLEX connector. Make sure
to check what type of fan connector you need before buying your fan.
The analog 3-pin and MOLEX connectors provide power to the fan to
make it spin. Four-pin connectors are digitally controlled and let the
system to alter fan speeds dynamically.
Many motherboards (and dedicated fan controllers) will feature an array
of 3-pin and/or 4-pin fan headers that are placed at diﬀerent  locations
around the board.
Installing a new fan
Note: Before you install any component in your PC, make sure the
PC is powered oﬀ.
To remove a faulty fan or install a new one, you’ll need a Phillips head
screwdriver.
If you’re replacing a fan, remove the old one by unscrewing it from the
case and unplugging the cable from the header (or MOLEX connection).
You can reuse the screws if your new fan doesn’t come with any.
To mount a fan, hold it up to the mounting position so that the holes for
screws line up with the holes in the case. While holding the fan in place
with one hand, use four screws to secure it in place with the other hand.
To install a case fan, hold the fan in place with one hand. With the
other hand, tighten secure the fan in place with four screws
If you just have plastic friction clips holding a fan in place, simply un-snap
the clips, remove the fan, and pop the new one in its place.
Next, attach the fan to an unused fan header. The headers are keyed to
ensure a proper connection. Four-pin headers will work with 3-pin fans,
but you won’t have control over fan speeds.
Four-pin fan connections allow your computer to change the fan’ s speed
on-the-ﬂy. Usually, a system will lower speed to reduce noise and
increase speed when more cooling is needed.
Buying a fan controller will give you additional fan headers. Alternatively,
you can use 3-pin/4-pin to MOLEX adapters and connect the fans right to
the PSU. (MOLEX connectors are keyed as well.)
MOLEX fan connectors are older and don’t oﬀer  any controls for the
fan, but they’re easy to connect.
One ﬁnal note: Route your fan (and other) cables using appropriate cable
management or some zip-ties. This will ensure that cables don’t hit the
fan as it spins, causing a buzzing sound. Cables  that come in contact with
fans can also stop the fan completely, or worse, damage the cable.
Image: Thiago Trevisan/IDG
Image: Thiago Trevisan/IDG
Image: Thiago Trevisan/IDG
Image: Thiago Trevisan/IDG
Image: Marco Chiappetta
Image: Thiago Trevisan/IDG
A.I. SearchAsk your own question...
NEWS  BEST PICKS  REVIEWS  HOW-TO  DEALS LAPTOPS WINDOWS SECURITY TECHHIVE  MORE
