Increase the overall speed of your PC, the time it takes to boot and load programs by following our simple guide to installing a solid
state drive. Having successfully helped thousands of people of all ages, backgrounds, and computer-skill levels install SSDs, we’re
confident that you too, will be able to expertly install an SSD in your desktop PC. Installing an SSD requires little more than a
screwdriver and your system’s owner’s manual, so let’s install an SSD in your desktop computer. 
Transferring data to your new hard drive
If you are replacing your existing drive, we recommend the use of data migration (cloning) software to move all the files from your
existing drive onto your new hard drive. Data migration software is available here at Crucial.com.
To install an SSD in a Mac  system, the process is different – follow our Mac-specific SSD install steps here.
Desktop SSD installation instructions
1.    Make sure you’re working in a static-safe environment
 Remove any plastic bags or papers from your work space.
2.    Gather supplies
2.5-inch Crucial SSD
Screwdriver
Your computer’s owner’s manual (which will specify the type of screwdriver you need)
3.    Shut down your system
When your system has been powered off, unplug the power cable.
4.    Hold down the power button for 5 seconds to discharge residual electricity 
5.    Open your desktop’s case
Refer to your system’s owner’s manual for how to do this.
6.    Ground yourself by touching an unpainted metal surface
This is an extra safeguard that protects your drive and components from static damage during the installation process.
7.    Locate the storage bay
Refer to your owner’s manual for the exact location and note the size of the bays.
Some storage bays and existing hard drives are significantly larger than a standard size SSD. If this is the case in your system, you’ll
need a 2.5-inch to 3.5-inch converter to make the SSD fit snugly. Remove your old drive and disconnect any cables and brackets
attached to it.
8.    Plug the SSD into your system
 Don’t force the connection – it should plug in easily and fit snugly.
To install the SSD as a secondary drive (not your primary or boot drive), use a SATA cable and attach one end of the cable to the
SATA connector on your motherboard. Attach the other end of the SATA cable to your Crucial SSD. Then, use an available SATA
power cable coming from your system’s power supply and connect the cable to your Crucial SSD. For either type of install, consult
your owner’s manual for how to remove an existing drive (if necessary), and how to handle the cables.
9.    Reassemble your desktop
10.    Power on your computer 
Your SSD is installed!
Have some fun and see how much faster your desktop boots up and apps load! You can make your SSD even faster by downloading
our Crucial Storage Executive software and enabling the Momentum Cache feature. Click here to download Storage Executive.
FAQs & Troubleshooting
Enable the Momentum Cache feature in Storage Executive to get up to 10x faster performance, validated by testing included in the “Enhance Burst
Performance on Micron and Crucial SSDs Using Momentum Cache” whitepaper.
2017 Micron Technology, Inc. All rights reserved. Information, products, and/or specifications are subject to change without notice. Neither Crucial nor
Micron Technology, Inc. is responsible for omissions or errors in typography or photography. Micron, the Micron logo, Crucial, and the Crucial logo are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Micron Technology, Inc. Mac is either a registered trademark or trademark of Apple, Inc in the United States
and/or other countries. All other trademarks and service marks are the property of their respective owners.
Sign up today and join our newsletter. Stay in the know with Crucial and our latest
products!
Contact Us
United Kingdom
© 2025 Micron Technology, Inc. All rights reserved
How to install a solid
state drive (SSD) in a
PC
®
Warning!  Warning!  Warning!  Warning!   —         Static electricity can damage the components in your system. To protect your system’s components from static
damage during the installation process, touch any of the unpainted metal surfaces on your computer’s frame or wear an ESD
wrist strap before touching or handling internal components. Either method will safely discharge static electricity that’s
naturally present in your body.
How to install an SSD safely
To protect your new SSD, do not touch the connectors on the drive.
Do not open the SSD. Doing so will void your warranty.
Watch on
Part 1/4: How to install an SSD in a laptop or desktop (preparation phase)
Share
® 
1
Why isn't my SSD showing up in BIOS or Disk Management?
How do I initialize a new SSD?
How do I format my SSD?
Why is my SSD making noise?
1
©
Shop Storage Now
Related Articles
The M.2 Form Factor with
PCIe® and SATA interfaces
Confused about M.2, PCIe, SATA and NVMe
SSDs? The experts at Crucial explain all you need
to know about form factors, physical interfaces
and more.
Read more
How to Find the Best SSD for
Your Laptop
Laptop SSDs need to be compatible for form
factors and connection protocols and cover your
data needs. Find the best SSD drive for your
laptop with Crucial.
Read more
What is an NVMe SSD?
Want to know more about NVMe SSDs? Discover
with Crucial what an NVMe does, the benefits of
NVMe SSDs and how they differ from other
storage devices.
Read more
SubmitEnter EmailEmail address*
Legal
Terms of use
Your Privacy Choices
Privacy Notice
Compliance
Sustainability
Customer Service
Contact
Product registration
Warranty Status
Resources
Upgrades
Storage Executive
Acronis Data Transfer
Firmware updates
FAQs
Crucial
About Us
Awards
Press
Articles
Innovative memory and storage solutions direct from Micron for 45 years.
Shop RAM Shop SSDs Solutions Support
 Upgrade Computer Search
Stay connected with Crucial!
 
Sign up today to receive the latest product updates, tech
insights, and innovations from Crucial.
 
 
Email submit
✕
Email
