Join Our Team | Our Audience | About Us | Press & Events | Contact Us
Follow Us      
Advertising | Careers | Terms | Privacy | Policies
XDA is part of the Valnet Publishing Group
Copyright © 2025 Valnet Inc.
Trending Ryzen 9 9950X3D  RTX 5070  Windows 11  Gaming  Forums
B…Karthik Iyer & Matthew Connatser… – Updated Feb 3, 2024 Sign In To Your XDA Account 
You just bought a new processor, a shiny new motherboard, and a new graphics card (that probably
set you back quite a bit sadly). Great! What's next? Grabbing all the new components and putting
them together to build a new computer. The first thing you need to do is toss that CPU on the
motherboard to bring your PC to life. Installing a CPU is like putting the brains into your computer.
Fortunately, it's a fairly simple task and there's no need to stress. You are less likely to make a
mistake and mess up the CPU installation as long as you pay attention to a few important things.
Prerequisites
Things you'll need to install a CPU
You really only need just the CPU and motherboard to perform the steps mentioned in this guide,
but let's look at a couple of other things that you might want to grab, and also some things to
consider while picking up the parts if you haven't already.
Thermal Paste: You'll need a thermal paste after installing the CPU, especially if you are
planning to install the motherboard and mount the CPU cooler right after. You can, however,
ignore it if your CPU cooler already has some pre-applied paste.
CPU Cooler: It goes without saying that you need a CPU cooler to make sure the CPU doesn't
overheat. This isn't optional, so be sure to grab either an air cooler or a liquid cooler.
A compatible motherboard: Not all CPUs work with all the motherboards on the market. A
lot of CPUs drop into different CPU sockets on the board, and they need dedicated and
compatible chipsets to work too. Intel's 12th and 13th Gen CPUs are compatible with LGA
1700 motherboards from the 600 and 700 series, Ryzen 7000 CPUs are only compatible with
AM5 motherboards using a 600 series chipset, and Ryzen 1000 to 5000 CPUs are compatible
with AM4 motherboards using the 300, 400, or 500 series chipsets.
A clean working area: You do not want to accidentally get something into a CPU socket.
Wherever you're doing this, make sure there aren't any liquids or any materials that could
potentially damage the socket.
And that's pretty much it for the pre-requisites. Installing just the CPU is a tool-free operation,
though installing the CPU cooler (the next step) usually requires at least a screwdriver.
How to install a CPU
A simple process that only takes a few minutes
1. Look for the CPU socket on the motherboard that is located at the center towards the top
next to the RAM slots.
2. Place your finger or thumb on the metal lever on the right side, and push it down while
moving it slightly away from the socket. For LGA 1700 and AM5 motherboards, you just need
to lift this arm up enough that it frees the metal frame covering the CPU socket. For AM4
motherboards, make sure this arm is pointing directly upwards.
3. Pick up the CPU by only holding on to its sides, and prepare to insert it into the socket. Avoid
touching any pins on the motherboard or CPU.
4. Look for a small triangle indicator on the corner of the CPU and the socket and align them
properly.
5. Place the CPU on the socket, ensuring it sits easily and lays flat without having to apply any
external force or pressure.
6. If your motherboard has an LGA socket, then you first need to lower the metal frame onto
the CPU, and use the metal lever to secure the metal frame back into its original position.
Those using a motherboard with a PGA socket (such as an AM4) simply need to lower the arm
down completely to hold the CPU in place. You'll have to apply some force in either case, so
keep that in mind.
Closing thoughts
Once you're done installing the CPU and all the other core components on the motherboard such as
the RAM and the SSD, it's time to install the CPU cooler (or at least some parts of it), and put this
collection of hardware into the case. After that, it's just installing the GPU, plugging in some cables,
and you're done building the PC.
The images featured in this guide are for LGA style sockets like LGA 1700 and AM5, but the process
is pretty similar for PGA sockets like AM4 and AM3. The process of installing enthusiast chips like
the AMD Threadripper and Intel's Xeon CPUs is slightly different, but you probably already know
how to install a CPU if you're dealing with those chips.
CPU PCs Intel
Follow Like
X⼝間
Installing a CPU on the motherboard is a lot easier if you do it outside the PC case, so do it
before mounting the motherboard inside the case. This will give you more space to work
with instead of having to restrict yourself with the limited space inside the chassis. If
you're installing a new CPU in an existing build, then we recommend taking out the
motherboard first.
Tip
Follow Like  Share
Readers like you help support XDA. When you make a purchase using links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Read More.


 RECOMMENDED
Nvidia's tight rope pricing is finally
starting to fray
Gamers may want the cards, but not at these prices.
2 days ago  2
6 best open-source options for project
management
Open source tools are great for every aspect of
computing.
2 days ago  3
5 reasons Podman is better than
Docker for self-host enthusiasts
If you're a self-host enthusiast and you're weighing up
Docker versus Podman, I strongly recommend Podman.
1 day ago  7
5 productivity hacks I discovered after
testing dozens of personal knowledge
management tools
Actionable productivity tricks I found using different PKM
tools
1 day ago 
6 CPUs and GPUs I regret not buying at
launch
Only know you love her when you let her go
21 hours ago  2
How I replaced all these streaming
services with one self-hosted app
Cutting the online streaming cord with this one free self-
hosted app.
2 days ago  29
Nvidia
Open Source
Software and Services
Productivity & Creativity Tools
GPU
Software and Services
Today's Best Deals
See More
Pick up this space-saving
mini PC for everyday tasks
as it drops to just $111
4 hours ago
This week's hot PC gaming
Steam deals Apr.6-12
5 hours ago
This Seagate external
drive gives you a massive
14TB of storage for only…
$2007 hours ago
Trending Now
Grab this Crucial 1TB M.2
SSD for less as it drop to its
lowest price
The OneXFly F1 Pro is the
best PC gaming handheld
I've used —  but there's a…
catch
I ignored these 5 backup
strategies until my hard
drive died
How to install a CPU on the motherboard: A
beginners guide

 Sign In Now
