HOT TOPICS Best laptops Best VPN Best antivirus Best SSDs Best monitors Laptop deals Desktop PC deals Newsletters
When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn't aﬀect  our editorial independence.
Home / How-To / Business How-To
HOW-TO
How to install an SSD in a PCWe show you how to do it with an M.2 or SATA SSD.
By Adam Patrick Murray
FEB 25, 2021 3:01 AM PST
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Some M.2 SSDs
come with their
own heat sink.
Installing an M.2 or SATA SSD in your desktop is an
essential part of every PC build, or an easy upgrade to make your PC feel
faster. Luckily, installing an SSD is easier than ﬁnding the best one (we
have a roundup for that!) or even understanding how they work. I’m not
going to cover any of that here, but I’ll walk through installing both
kinds. 
The steps below should apply to almost any model. I’ll start with the M.2
SSD because it’ s a bit more tricky to install, and there are some things to
research before you do it. Click this link to jump to the section on SATA
SSDs.
How to install an M.2 SSD in a desktop PC
An M.2 SSD looks like a stick of chewing gum with chips on one side, a
label on the other, and gold contacts at one end. Some will install just like
that. Some will come with their own heat sinks and look more like a pack
of gum than a stick of gum. Some motherboards will have a shield for the
M.2 slot, and you’ll have to shimmy the drive underneath it. We’ll cover
all the forms below. 
Step 1: Find the M.2 slot
Before installing an M.2 SSD, identify the M.2 slots on your
motherboard. They may be in diﬀerent  locations: On this board,
there’ s a black one at the left, and a chrome-plated one on the
right. Each slot’ s specs will be in the motherboard manual.
The ﬁrst thing you want to do is ﬁnd where the M.2 slot is on your
motherboard. Look for a slot about one inch wide that protrudes from the
motherboard about a quarter of an inch. Every motherboard is diﬀerent,
but the most common locations are below the CPU and around the PCIe
slots in the lower half of the board. Check the manual if you have trouble
ﬁnding it.
Some motherboards have a pre-installed shield in place that serves as a
heat spreader but also can provide a nice piece of visual ﬂair. This will
obviously have to be removed before you access the M.2 slot.
If your motherboard supports two M.2 SSDs you’ll need to consult your
manual to see which slot is the recommended one for installing your boot
drive. Each slot might oﬀer  diﬀerent  performance levels, while others
might turn oﬀ  a PCIe slot if used. In short,  read the manual ﬁrst!
Step 2: Find the M.2 Mounting System
The M.2 slot will have a mounting system, such as the standoﬀ  with
a screw shown here (see orange circle we’re pointing to, above),
which keeps the SSD straight when it’ s installed on the
motherboard.
Once you’ve found the right slot, ﬁnd the screw about three inches to the
left that is inserted into a standoﬀ. The standoﬀ  is there because when the
drive is inserted, there will be a gap between the SSD and the
motherboard. The standoﬀ  plays the crucial role of keeping the drive ﬂat.
If your motherboard doesn’t have the screw or standoﬀ, look in the box—
it might be in a small plastic bag. If your motherboard features an M.2
shield, you’ll need to ﬁnd two screws that mount it to the motherboard.
Step 3: Prep for M.2 SSD installation
Now it’ s time to touch something metal, like a metal furniture leg, in order
to ground yourself, then grab a screwdriver. Unscrew the screw from the
standoﬀ  and place it somewhere safe—you  do not want to lose a screw,
or have it roll around on your motherboard.
For those of you with a shield, unscrew it from the motherboard but take
note of the underside, where there should be a thermal pad with a piece
of plastic over it. Do not remove the plastic yet—just  place the shield
somewhere safe. 
EXPLORE FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Can I install an M.2 SSD in a PCIe slot?
How does an M.2 SSD diﬀer  from a SATA SSD?
How do I optimize my PC's performance with an SSD?
What are the common myths about M.2 SSD installation?
Can I use an M.2 SSD as a secondary storage drive?
If your M.2 slot has a shield, check the back for a layer of thermal
paste, covered by a small sheet of plastic. Leave that alone for
now, and set aside the shield in a safe place for later use.
The most common M.2 size is 80 millimeters, but in any case you need to
make sure the standoﬀ  is positioned correctly for your size of drive. Hover
the drive over the slot and take note of the length. If necessary, use pliers
to loosen the standoﬀ  and move it to the appropriate length position.
Make sure the standoﬀ  is screwed in fully–not too tight, just snug. You
don’t want it spinning while we are trying to install the screw.
For those of you with shields, you most likely don’t have a standoﬀ.
Instead there should be a squarish brace of some sort for the drive to rest
on while the shield holds it in place.
Step 4: M.2 SSD installation
The top of the M.2 SSD is the side with the label on it. At the left,
you can see the semi-circular notch for the motherboard screw. At
right, you see the gold contacts for the M.2 slot.
The next step is to insert the drive. Consider the “top” of the drive to be
the side with the brand’ s label or sticker. The edge with the semi-circle
notch is what’ s going to be held in place by the screw. The edge with
gold contact points is what we insert into the M.2 slot.
There’ s a tiny notch dividing the contact points into two sections. You’ll
want to line up that notch with a notch inside the M.2 slot, with the top of
the drive facing up. Insert the drive ﬁrmly at about a 15-degree angle until
there’ s no more give, and let go.
Line up the contacts on the SSD with the contacts on the M.2 slot.
Note the tiny notch, which also needs to line up with the slot.
If you have a screw and standoﬀ-based  system you’ll want to press down
on the drive so that it lies ﬂat, and the semi-circlular notch lines up with
the standoﬀ. While holding the drive ﬂat, insert the screw and tighten to a
comfortable point. Take care not to overtighten, or you risk damage to
the drive, the screw, or the motherboard. If you’ve installed it correctly,
the drive should not shift in place at all.
Align the semicircular notch on your SSD with the standoﬀ,  and
tighten the screw carefully into the standoﬀ  so the SSD doesn’t
move. Do not overtighten, or you could damage something
important!
For those of you with shields you’ll have a bit more to wrangle, so take
your time through these next steps.
Because there is no screw to keep the drive ﬂat, you’ll have to hold it
down while you place the shield over it, or get help from someone who
can hold it ﬂat while you handle the shield. It might help to do a dry run
before you remove the plastic sheet from the thermal pad—just  be sure to
not leave that plastic on permanently!
Remember to remove the plastic sheet from the thermal paste
before you install the shield over the SSD.
When you are ready, take the plastic oﬀ  and lower the shield straight onto
the drive. It’ s important to lower it straight onto the drive, because the
thermal pad is tacky and may cause the drive to slide out of its slot if you
shift it after it’ s adhered to the shield. If that does happen, don’t panic:
Carefully remove the SSD from the thermal pad and start over.
The hardest part here is lining the screws up to the standoﬀs.  One trick is
to hold the screws in place on the shield as you lower it. This allows the
screws to touch the standoﬀs  before the thermal pad touches the drive.
It helps to have a friend hold the SSD ﬂat while you pay attention
to lowering the shield over it and carefully aligning and tightening
the screws. Feel free to practice a few times before you expose the
thermal paste and do it for real.
Once the screws are lined up, lower the shield into place and tighten the
screws. Again, no need to overtighten them–it just needs to be snug.
M.2 SSD Install: Final Notes
The last thing to note here is that
some M.2 SSDs feature their own
built-in heat sink. An Adata XPG
Gammix S70 drive we reviewed had
a heat sink so big, it made the drive
a challenge to install. Most of the
ones we’ve tested are less
obtrusive. 
If your motherboard has a shield you
don’t want to place that over the
included heat sink. Just store the
shield somewhere safe in case you need to use it in the future. 
Next, we dive into installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD. 
How to install a 2.5-inch SATA SSD in a
desktop PC
A 2.5-inch SATA SSD can be installed in a desktop PC in a variety of
ways.
Now let’ s move on to installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD. This installation is
much more dependent on the PC case you are using and where you want
to place it, so there’ s an endless variety of possibilities.
Instead of an exact step-by-step guide, we’ll cover the basics that will
always apply to every installation. Once again I’m assuming you already
have a drive in hand, if not check out our roundup of the best SSDs.
If you install a 2.5-inch SATA SSD in a drive bay, you can usually jut
slide it into the PC.
The two most common options for installing the drive in a PC is either to
put it in a drive cage or to secure it to the case itself. Drive cages usually
have some sort of method to attach the drive to the tray, and the tray
slides into a cage.
You can attach a SATA SSD directly to your desktop case.
Mounting it to the case can involve either screwing the drive to the metal,
or putting the drive into a tray ﬁrst and then attaching it. Either way take
care to make sure you have enough cable length to safely route the
cables inside the case.
Installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD: Required cables
A SATA SSD needs two cables: One for data (top) and one for
power (bottom).
When installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD you will always need two things: a
SATA data cable and access to a SATA power cable. Most motherboards
include a SATA data cable, which is used for data transmission from the
drive to the motherboard. Look for a long, thin, and ﬂat cable—
sometimes with an L-shaped connector at the end.
The SATA power cable, which provides power to the drive, will be
included with the power supply. It usually has multiple connectors.
Installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD: Attaching the cables
The SATA SSD has connections for power (left) and data (right)
cables.
In order to use the SSD you will need to have both cables attached and
secured to the drive at all times. Depending on where you install the drive
in the case it might be easier to plug the cables in before you mount the
drive.
Plugging in both cables is simple: Look for the end of the drive that has
the connections, and note there are two. The shorter port is for the
interface cable, and the longer port is for the power cable. If you look
closely, each port is keyed with a tiny notch that indicates the correct
orientation for the cable to plug into.
Because of this there is only one way to install the cable, so line them up
and insert ﬁrmly. The interface cable includes a primitive locking
mechanism that gives a subtle click when inserted. The power cable does
not lock in, so be sure to press it in all the way for a secure connection.
Installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD: Connection to
Motherboard
Watch on
How to Install An SSD in a PC
Share
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
TABLE OF CONTENTS
How to install an M.2
SSD in a desktop PC
How to install a 2.5-
inch SATA SSD in a
desktop PC
A.I. SearchAsk your own question...
NEWS  BEST PICKS  REVIEWS  HOW-TO  DEALS LAPTOPS WINDOWS SECURITY TECHHIVE  MORE
PCWorld helps you navigate the PC ecosystem to ﬁnd the products you want and the
advice you need to get the job done.
POLICIES
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Copyright Notice
European Privacy Settings
Member Preferences
Editorial independence
Licensing & Eprints
California: Do not Sell my Personal Info
ABOUT
About Us
Advertise
Ad Choice
Contact Us
Foundry Careers
GamePro
Smart Answers
PCWORLD CATEGORIES
Business
Laptop
Mobile
PC Hardware
Storage
Deals
TechHive
SUBSCRIBE
Digital Magazine - Subscribe
Digital Magazine - Info
Gift Subscription
Newsletters
Copyright © 2025 IDG Communications, Inc. Explore the Foundry Network + Privacy Settings
The SATA ports are detailed in the motherboard manual. You’ll
likely want to plug into the SATA-1 port.
The interface cable will then need to be plugged into the motherboard.
There will most likely be multiple ports to choose from, so now is another
time you should consult your manual.
You’ll need to ﬁnd where the manual refers to the SATA ports on your
motherboard. To get the maximum bandwidth out of your SSD you’ll
want to connect to the SATA 6Gbps ports, but the slower 3Gbps ports
will work ﬁne as well.
Your motherboard might have a stack of SATA ports. Check your
manual to conﬁrm which one is the SATA-1 port, the one you’d
normally want to use for your SSD.
In this example you can see that this motherboard features six SATA 6G
ports, and they are stacked  into three columns of two ports. Typically
you’ll want to use the ports in order, so if the numbering starts at one,
choose that and identify which port it is on the motherboard itself.
This detail shows the data cable from the SSD plugged into the
SATA-1 port on the motherboard.
On any remotely modern PC, the performance should be the same, but
on an older PC the ﬁrst port is usually the highest-performing. When the
ports are stacked like this sometimes it can be a bit confusing knowing
which number is which, so just take your time and look closely. This cable
will lock into place, so after you insert it in enough you will hear a subtle
click to know you are secure.
Installing a 2.5-inch SATA SSD: Final notes
As we close out SATA SSD installation, a few useful notes.
Some of the SATA data connectors feature an L-shaped plug, shown
below.
When you install a SATA SSD, you might need to use the L-shaped
data cable from your motherboard to ﬁt into a tight space. It
performs identically compared to the straight cable.
The L-shaped plug is useful for situations where you need to keep a low
proﬁle so the cable doesn’t get pinned somewhere. Both the L-shaped
and the straight cables oﬀer  the same performance.
The SATA power cable will most likely have multiple ports on it. This is to
allow you to attach multiple drives or peripherals onto the same cable. 
The SATA cable from your power supply will likely have several
ports so you may connect multiple drives via the same cable. 
Which plug you use will depend on the length you need to reach to plug
in the drive and whether that cable also needs to reach other ports. All
the plugs will work just the same.
Finally, a Windows 10 tip! If you are installing both an M.2 and SATA SSD
you might be confused as to which drive is which when it comes time to
install Windows.
One way to get around that is to keep the SATA SSD unplugged while
you’re going through the installation process, so there’ s no option for
installing Windows other than the higher-performance NVMe SSD. After
you’re up and running, plug the SATA drive back in, format it, and you’re
ready to roll.
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
Image: Adam Patrick Murray/IDG
