Jul 2021 PERSONAL STORAGE PC PERFORMANCE SSD M.2 NVME CLIENT SSD Blog Home
Installing a Kingston M.2 SSD (Solid-State Drive) is easy and will boost the performance of your computer significantly. Follow the steps below to
speed up your device and free up storage.
Step 1: Preparing your workspace
You’ll need to prep your workspace to install your new Kingston SSD safely
and properly. Clearing your workspace of anything that can build up static
electricity is important since it can damage your new M.2 drive.
1. Gather your supplies. You’ll need your computer, a screwdriver and your
new Kingston SSD, along with your computer’s owner’s manual.
2. Back up your important files. Before installing your SSD, save your
important files from your old computer storage to an external SSD, a
USB flash drive or Cloud storage.
3. Take your time. You now have everything you need to install your new
M.2 SSD. Your computer might look slightly diﬀerent to the ones shown
but the process should be the same. Read each step carefully. If you
have diﬃculty identifying your computer components, refer to your
computer’s owner’s manual.
Helpful tip: NVMe SSD support and drivers are not supported by Windows® 7. Try
contacting your computer or motherboard manufacturer for further assistance.
Microsoft® oﬀers hotfix support for Windows® 7 that can natively support NVMe
drives.
Step 2: Installing your M.2 SSD
1. Shut down your computer completely.
2. Remove the power cable and battery. Only remove the battery if you’re
installing a M.2 SSD into a laptop/notebook. Refer to your owner’s
manual to see how to safely remove the battery.
3. Discharge your battery. You’ll want to discharge potential static
electricity that might be built up in your laptop battery. Remove the
battery and hold the power button on your laptop/notebook for five
seconds to discharge any residual electricity.
4. Open the computer case. Each case is designed diﬀerently, so refer to
your owner’s manual to see how to properly open your case.
5. Ground yourself as a precautionary step. Touch a metal surface that’s
clear of any paint or coating to discharge any electricity that’s present in
your body.
6. Find the M.2 PCIe slot, which should be easy to spot in a desktop
computer. For laptops/notebooks, the M.2 PCIe slot is usually under the
bottom panel or under the keyboard. Check your owner’s manual for
further assistance.
7. Insert your Kingston M.2 SSD carefully by holding the SSD by the sides.
Make sure to avoid touching the gold connector pins. Align the connectors on the SSD with those on the PCIe slot and insert the M.2 SSD at a
30-degree angle. It should connect easily without you having to force the connection.
It might be necessary to screw the M.2 SSD to the mount on the PCIe slot to secure it in place. Be careful not to overtighten the screw or you
can risk damaging the SSD. It’s a good idea to refer to your owner’s manual for this step.
8. Reassemble your computer. After installing the M.2 SSD, put your desktop computer back together. If you’re working with a laptop or
notebook, remember to put your battery back in if you removed it.
9. Turn on your computer. Your computer should be booting up from your old storage drive, unless you removed it before installing your new
SSD. Now it’s time to clone the data from your old storage drive to your new M.2 SSD.
Step 3: Cloning your M.2 SSD
1. Download the cloning software. If you didn’t receive the Acronis
Cloning software as part of a Kingston SSD bundle kit, download the
Acronis Cloning software here. You’ll need to activate the software by
creating an account and following the activation instructions.
2. Start the application. Once you’ve completed activating Acronis Cloning
software, launch the Acronis True Image OEM application and click
Clone Disk.
3. Select Clone Method. Select the Automatic clone method and click
Next.
4. Select Source Disk. Select the source disk that you wish to clone from
and click Next.
5. Select Destination Disk. Select the destination disk that you wish to
clone to and click Next.
6. Summary. Confirm that you have selected the correct source and destination disks. You may also review the changes to the destination disk
under Before and After. Click Proceed to begin the data transfer operation.
7. Data transfer. A notification will appear letting you know it is time to restart your computer. Close any other open applications and click
Restart when you are ready.
The system will boot into the Acronis cloning application and the data transfer operation will begin. When the data transfer is complete, your
computer will shut down.
8. The cloning process is now complete. While the computer is completely shut down, you can remove your old storage drive. Once you turn
your computer on again, it will boot up from your new M.2 SSD.
Step 4: Download the SSD Manager
Kingston® SSD Manager is an application that provides users with the ability to monitor and manage various aspects of their Kingston SSD. You’ll
be able to monitor the drive health, status and disk usage.
Download the Kingston SSD Manager and follow the installation process here.
1. Once downloaded, launch the SSD Manager.
This software allows you to monitor the device information and health status. You can improve the performance of your new SSD by using the
system resources.
2. Run the SSD Manager software and follow the installation process. When launching for the first time, the SSD Manager will scan your
computer for disk drives.
3. You have now completed installing the Kingston SSD Manager. It may require you to restart your computer after completing the installation.
Congratulations on installing your new Kingston M.2 SSD! You’ll be able to experience the storage advantages of the SSD and see an
improvement in your computer’s performance from boot times to storage recall speeds.
#KingstonIsWithYou
Was this helpful?
Related Videos
How to install an M.2 SSD in a laptop
It’s easy to install an M.2 SSD into a laptop
computer. We’ll show you how.
How to install an M.2 SSD in a desktop
PC
It’s easy to install an M.2 SSD into a desktop
PC. We’ll show you how.
How to install an NVMe SSD in a laptop
We show you each step to formatting and
erasing an SSD or HDD.
Install an internal M.2 into an external
enclosure
You can make SSD enclosures that are less
expensive than you might think.
1:29
 1:10
 3:22
 4:52
Related Products
• PCIe 4.0 NVMe
• M.2 2280 form factor
• 512GB, 1024GB, 2048GB, 4096GB
• Up to 7,000MB/s read, 7,000MB/s write
Learn more Buy
• Ideal for gamers and PC enthusiasts
• PCIe 4.0 NVMe M.2 2280
• 500GB, 1TB, 2TB, 4TB
• Up to 7,300MB/s read, 7,000MB/s write
Learn more Buy
Related Articles
Blog Home
How to install a 2.5” SSD –
Kingston Technology
Installing an SSD is easy and can
improve the overall speed of your
desktop PC or laptop.
Installing an M.2 SSD in a
PlayStation® 5
Get more storage in your PS5™  with a
simple upgrade using the empty M.2
slot.
How to optimise your PC for
better performance
Upgrading your RAM and SSD can
help improve your overall PC
performance.
How does hardware-based SSD
encryption work? Software vs
hardware, AES 256-bit and TCG…
Opal 2.0Secure important personal and
private information on a PC with a
hardware-encrypted SSD.
The difference between SSD and
HDD
Why should you choose an SSD over
an HDD? The main factor is better
performance from SSDs.
How much memory do you need
for video editing?
More DRAM means faster PC
performance when editing from
video, from playback responsivenes…
to render time. But is 8, 16, 32 or 64GB
enough? How much do you need for
1080p, 4K, or 8K?
NVMe vs SATA: What is the
difference?
NVMe is the new protocol for flash
storage while SATA was a hold-over
from HDD.
Top 4 SSD buying mistakes
Don’t pick the wrong type of SSD for
your server. A wrong choice means a
higher cost of ownership. Learn to…
pick the right SSDs.
PC PERFORMANCE |  PERSONAL STORAGE |  SSD |    
GAMING |  M.2 |  PERSONAL STORAGE |  KINGSTON FURY |  
PC PERFORMANCE |  DIY PC |  MEMORY |  CLIENT SSD |  
PERSONAL STORAGE |  CLIENT SSD |  DATA SECURITY
NVME |  SATA |  CLIENT SSD |  PC PERFORMANCE |  
PC PERFORMANCE |  PERSONAL STORAGE |  MEMORY |   
NVME |  PC PERFORMANCE |  SSD |  SATA |   
ENTERPRISE SSD |  CLIENT SSD |  SERVERS/DATA CENTRES |   
More
ACCOUNT
View Basket
Log In/Register
COMPANY
About
Careers
Contact
Press
Partner Program
COMPLIANCE
Corporate Compliance
Environmental compliance
Management Systems
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Sustainability
Code of Conduct
Modern Slavery Statement
LEGAL
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Warranty
SITE
Main Site
Shop Kingston US
Feedback
SUBSCRIBE
Keep in touch! Sign up to
our emails for Kingston
news and more.
     
©2025 Kingston Technology Europe Co LLP and Kingston Digital Europe Co LLP , Kingston Court, Brooklands Close, Sunbury-on-Thames, Middlesex, TW16 7EP , England. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. United Kingdom
Sign up now
How to install an M.2 PCIe NVMe SSD
Watch Video
KC3000 PCIe 4.0 NVMe M.2 SSD Kingston FURY Renegade PCIe 4.0 NVMe M.2 SSD
Sort by Default

