More from Lifewire
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
How to Choose a
Motherboard: 7 Factors to
Consider
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
Motherboard Drivers:
What They Are and How to
Identify Them
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What Does a Motherboard
Do?
HDD & SSD
What Is CMOS and What
Is It For?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
How to Check RAM and
Motherboard Compatibility
CARDS
What Is a Video Card?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What Is an Expansion Slot?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
Motherboard Fan
Connectors: What They
Are and How They Work
CARDS
What Is a Sound Card?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What's a Safe Motherboard
Temperature?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
Motherboard RAM Slots:
What They Are and How to
Use Them
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What Should I Upgrade on
My PC?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
Motherboard Standoffs:
What They Are and When
You Need One
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What Is an IDE Cable?
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
How to Replace a
Motherboard
ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE
What Motherboard Do I
Have? 4 Ways to Find Out
Motherboard ports are the inputs or connection points where
components plug into, including the rear ports at the back of a
computer. 
If you’re replacing an internal hardware component or upgrading for
better performance, you must remove the existing equipment from its
dedicated motherboard port. To install new components, you do the
opposite and plug the new component(s) into a dedicated port. 
There are also external ports located on the rear of the motherboard,
for plugging in and disconnecting peripherals. Without opening the
case, you can plug a mouse, keyboard, or external hard drive into the
top or rear USB ports, for instance.
There are several types of internal ports including PCI-e, SATA, CPU,
and so on. There are also external ports like USB, PS/2, RJ-45, and
beyond. Both are referred to as ports.
What's Inside a Computer? What Plugs Into
the Motherboard?
Inside a computer chassis or case is a collection of components,
including a motherboard, CPU or processor, RAM, graphics card,
and more. Collectively, these components make up a computer and
are what allow it to run. The motherboard is the skeleton or frame that
connects all of the individual components.
Motherboard ports are the various connection points where all of
those components connect and plugin. For example, RAM slots are
one type of port, usually located close to the CPU, and they are where
you’d plug-in memory modules.
In short, all computer components plug into one of the motherboard
ports, and the motherboard rests inside the chassis — what you may
know as a computer tower.
What Ports Are on a Motherboard?
To make things a little easier, we’re going to separate the ports into
two categories: Internal and external.
Internal vs. External Motherboard Ports: What's the
Difference?
Internal ports are for the core components of a computer which reside
inside the case. External ports are for peripherals and they reside
outside the case, usually at the rear.
If you wanted to install an external hard drive by plugging it into a
USB port, you would be using one of the external ports, generally
located on the back of the motherboard which would be at the rear of
the computer as you use it.
However, if you wanted to install an internal hard drive, including a
solid-state drive, you would need to open the case and plug it into
one of the internal ports on the motherboard. The same is true for
expansion slots, where you might plug in something like a better
graphics or additional RAM.
Laptops also have a motherboard inside, but due to their compact
size you are usually limited by what you can upgrade or install.
Internal Motherboard Ports
Here are some of the most common internal ports on a modern
motherboard:
There may be additional ports such as a COM/Serial header, TPM
header, or RGB headers. Some ports will not be used, and sometimes
there are redundant connections.
External Motherboard Ports (Rear Ports)
Here are some of the most common external ports on a modern
motherboard:
What Are the Types of Ports on a
Motherboard?
There are a few different types of ports or connections on a
motherboard you need to be aware of.
Chipsets or sockets
Main component connectors
Expansion slots
Rear ports
A CPU socket is where the processor is plugged in, while chipsets
include pre-installed processing chips. They might be for audio,
video, or hardware enhancements depending on the make and model
of the motherboard. Some chipsets are designed to be compatible
with only one of the major CPU manufacturers, like Intel vs. AMD.
The main component connectors are the primary ports on a
motherboard, and they’re used for core components. Examples
include RAM slots, SATA connectors, fan slots, and so on.
Expansion slots refer to the additional ports for plugging in extra
hardware like graphics cards, solid-state drives, audio cards, and
more.
The rear ports are all of the rear connectors used to plug in
peripherals and external devices.
What Is a Motherboard Form Factor?
The form factor is basically the size of the motherboard, of which
there are 3 main classifications. The largest is ATX, followed by micro-
ATX, and finally mini-ATX.
The larger the motherboard, the more support it has for internal
hardware and peripherals. ATX boards, for example, often include
support for multiple graphics cards and expansion cards, whereas
mini-ATX only supports 1 or 2. Larger boards have more ports.
The large boards, like ATX and micro-ATX motherboards, also require
larger cases, or computer towers to accommodate both the bigger
size and the added components that will be plugged into them.
What Is the Motherboard Chipset?
A motherboard chipset can mean a couple of things, like what
additional hardware is supported. Typically, however, when someone
refers to the chipset they are talking about the mainboard support or
processor. Motherboards with AMD chipsets, for instance, are
designed to work with AMD’s processors, while motherboards with
Intel chipsets are designed to work with Intel’s processors.
With each type of chipset, there are different compatibilities, as both
Intel and AMD have released a huge variety of processors to the
market, and continue to do so.
How Do I Choose the Right Motherboard?
If you’re thinking about upgrading or installing a new motherboard,
there are a few things you’ll need to decide first.
What type of processor do you want? If you go with AMD you’ll need
to find an AMD-compatible motherboard with the appropriate CPU
socket and chipsets. The opposite is true if you want an Intel
processor.
What kind of expansion opportunities do you want? The more
expansion slots available on the motherboard, the more components
you can add later like a graphics card, sound card, or something else.
Do you want to use a solid-state drive? How many internal hard drives
do you plan on installing? Make sure there are enough SATA ports
and M.2 connectors for what you want.
Finally, how big or small do you want the computer to be? If you want
something super compact, you’ll be looking at mini-ATX boards,
which are also limited in terms of what you can install. They have
fewer expansion slots and sometimes fewer rear ports.
FAQ
Type cmd into the Windows search bar to open Command Prompt.
Type in wmic baseboard get product,Manufacturer  and press
Enter. You should see your motherboard manufacturer and model
displayed. If it doesn't work, make sure you type the command in
exactly as it appears here.
If you have an open PCIe slot, you can try installing a PCIe to SATA
expansion card. You can find them at online retailers like Amazon and
Newegg.
Visit your motherboard manufacturer's website and download the
latest version of BIOS. If you're using Windows to install it, open the
file and select Update. Wait for the new drivers to install, then select
Yes to restart your computer. If you're using another method to
update BIOS, or you're updating a system other than Windows, check
out Lifewire's complete guide to updating BIOS.
Was this page helpful?
>
Motherboard Ports: What They Are and How They
Work
Learn about internal and external motherboard ports
By   Updated on November 18, 2021   Reviewed by 
COMPUTERS, LAPTOPS & TABLETS ACCESSORIES & HARDWARE 32
Briley S. Kenney Michael Barton Heine Jr
Important: Installing and removing devices from the internal
ports on a motherboard requires technical knowledge. It’s
important to handle related components and the motherboard
carefully to avoid damaging them.
CPU socket - Where the CPU or processor plugs in.1.
CPU power connector - Power cable connection for the CPU.2.
ATX power connector - Power cable connection for the system.3.
DIMM/RAM Memory slots - Connectors for system memory or
RAM.
4.
PCIe slots (x16, x2, x1) - Expansion card slots, including the
graphics card.
5.
M.2 connection - Solid-state drive connection.6.
SATA ports - Modern internal hard drive ports.7.
Front panel connector - Connection for USB, and audio ports
on the front or top of the case.
8.
Front panel header - Connection for LED/RGB lighting, power
switch, and reset switch.
9.
USB headers (3.1, 2. etc.) - Connection for rear USB ports on
the motherboard.
10.
CMOS battery - Bios battery for when there’s no system power.11.
Fan headers - Connection for the case and system fans.12.
PS/2 - Used for older PS/2 interface keyboards.1.
USB - Connection for USB peripherals including keyboards,
mice, hard drives, audio equipment, and more.
2.
HDMI/DisplayPort/VGA - They’re all video or display
connectors to output video or audio to a monitor.
3.
Ethernet /RJ-45 - Connection for wired internet.4.
Analog/Digital Audio - Connections for speakers and digital
audio equipment, including home theater systems.
5.
How can you check which motherboard you have?
How can you add more SATA ports to a motherboard?
How can you update a motherboard's BIOS?
Tech for Humans
Hit Refresh on Your Tech News
Follow Us
Lifewire is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.
SUBSCRIBE
NEWS
WHAT TO BUY
HOW TO
FEATURES
ABOUT US
About Us Privacy Policy
Editorial Guidelines Terms of Service
Careers Advertise
Contact EU Privacy
ACCESSORIES &
HARDWARE
The Quick Guide to
Webcams
Keyboards & Mice
Monitors
Cards
HDD & SSD
Printers & Scanners
Raspberry Pi
TECH FOR HUMANS NEWS WHAT TO BUY HOW TO FEATURES ABOUT US
NEWSLETTER!
Stay Safe: Tornado Alert Apps 6 Plant Identification Apps to Try
