TRENDING Tariff Wars Switch 2 AMD RDNA 4 Nvidia Blackwell Where to Buy RX 9070
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
TOPICS
fan
  SEE ALL COMMENTS (34)
Christopher
Coke
Contributor
Chris is a regular contributor for Tom’s Hardware, covering mechanical
keyboards, peripherals, and content creation gear.
READ MORE
How to Apply Thermal Paste to Your CPU
Best AIO Coolers 2025
How to Check Your PC's CPU Temperature
Best Mini-ITX Cases 2025: Our Tested Picks for Compact PC Builds
MSI MEG Prospect 700R Case Review: Expensive excellence
PC components  >  Cooling  >  Case Fans
PC Airflow Guide: How to Set Up and
Position Your Fans
How-to By Christopher Coke last updated 29 September 2022
Arranging your case fans properly helps your system run at peak
performance. Here’s how to do it.
    Comments (34)
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it
works.
Computers rely on a steady stream of cool air to perform their best. There are
many ways to arrange your case fans, and relying on the case or system
manufacturer to choose that for you isn’t always the best choice. Opening up
your PC case and rearranging components can be a daunting task. We’re here to
help.
The good news is that fans are one of the simplest components inside your PC.
They’re usually connected to clear mounting points and use only four screws to
attach. Each fan uses a single connector for power, plus another if it has
customizable RGB. There are a few things you need to know to get started
organizing and arranging your fans. But once you do, arranging them for peak
performance isn’t difficult or exceptionally time consuming.
Case Fan Basics
Before deciding how to arrange your case fans, there are a handful of things to
know, including some key terms and specs. It’s important to choose the right fan
for the job, and that they’re oriented and connected correctly. Here are the most
important things to know. 
YOU MAY LIKE
How to Apply Thermal Paste to Your CPU
Best AIO Coolers 2025
Most Cases Come with Pre-Installed Fans: Most cases come with one or more
fans already installed. Nearly all will include a rear fan to exhaust hot air out the
back of your PC. The quality of case fans varies, but usually aligns with the
quality of the case. The best PC cases often include very good fans, while lower-
end options tend to use lower performance (and often louder) fans.
Fan Size: Fans come in a wide range of sizes, but the most common are 120mm
and 140mm, with big 200mm spinners seeing a bit of a resurgence lately as well.
The benefit to a larger fan is that it’s able to move the same volume of air at a
lower RPM, thereby reducing fan noise. Be sure to check your case to see which
sizes it supports and where they can be installed.  
CFM, RPM and Noise: The volume of air a fan can move is measured in Cubic
Feet Per Minute (CFM). This number can range widely depending on fan size,
RPM, and how it balances noise levels, but a “good” case fan will typically output
upwards of 50 CFM.
RPM, or Rotations Per Minute, is how fast a fan spins. The higher the RPM, the
more air it is likely to move; however, these high speeds often come at the cost
of noise, measured in decibels (dB). A fan that spins exceptionally fast is likely to
have a more powerful motor and to generate more vibrations that you’ll hear
when using your PC. If fan noise bothers you, try to aim for a fan below 30dB.
When shopping for case fans, look for the best balance of CFM and dB that fits
your budget. RPM is less important so long as the fan is able to move plenty of
air without making your PC sound like a jet engine. If you’re technical and have a
computer that supports it (prebuilt systems oftend don't), you can even go into
your system’s BIOS and create a custom fan curve to balance cooling
performance with noise levels.
Another option is to add more or larger fans to your system. Since multiple fans
and those with larger blades can move more air, making these changes allows
you to run them more slowly, lowering the total noise of your system.
Depending on the case fans you select, this can cost more than using fewer
smaller fans but gives you some extra control over your PCs acoustics.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Fan Orientation: Like any fan, the blowers in your PC have intake and exhaust
sides. If you’re not sure which is which, check the edges of the fan for a small
arrow. Manufacturers will often place this symbol along one edge of the fan to
indicate the direction of airflow. If this isn’t present, you can simply use your
hand to feel the direction the air is moving. Usually, the pretty brand sticker is
also on the intake side, since it’s more likely to be visible through glass or mesh
side panels.
(Image credit: Shutterstock)
Installation: Installing case fans is very easy. Your case should have set
mounting points on the front, rear, top, bottom, and sometimes even the sides.
Every case supports certain fan diameters (usually 120mm and 140mm), so be
sure to consult its documentation. 
Installation is as simple as inserting the fan into the case, lining it up with the
mounting holes, and screwing in four fasteners to lock it in place. Then, connect
the power cable to the matching fan header on your motherboard (and RGB
header if your fan has customizable RGB lighting). Removing the fan is just as
easy: disconnect the fan from its power and RGB connectors, unscrew the
fasteners, and you’re done. Of course, any time you are taking off your side
panel to do something inside your system, be sure the system is powered down
and unplugged. 
The Fundamentals of Airflow and Case Pressure
Generally, the goal of positioning fans in a PC case is to create an airflow channel
from the right side/front of your case to the upper left/rear. This channel should
bring cool air across the CPU, GPU and other heat sensitive components and
then exhaust out of the back and/or top. This path causes the air to heat up as it
travels, creating a cycle of cool air in, hot air out. 
Another important concept is case pressure. The amount of fans you have
blowing cool air in versus exhausting hot air out will create positive or negative
pressure. When they are perfectly balanced, this is considered neutral pressure.
Positive case pressure is when the fans are oriented to push more air into the
case than out. Negative pressure is created when there are more fans blowing
air out than sucking in. Neutral pressure is when there is an equal amount of
intake and exhaust. Because computer cases are not sealed, and the number
and power of fans can be mixed, you’ll usually lean slightly one way or the other. 
While there are proponents of both positive and negative pressure
arrangements, there are also benefits to both. A positive configuration makes
sure your components are always fed with fresh, cool air (which has the side
benefit of pushing dust away from your computer). A negative configuration
quickly exhausts heated air so it doesn’t stagnate.
Both pressure systems can succeed at creating an airflow channel, so your
components stay cool. Because of this, many users find it beneficial to balance
their intake and outake fans, focusing more on the direction they would like the
airflow to travel. Regardless which you choose, it’s wise to make sure your intake
fans are blowing cool air toward your GPU and CPU as directly as possible. This
means they should generally be on the front of the case, although if you have a
case with a vented bottom and feet that lift it significantly off the ground, intake
fans on the bottom can be a good option, too – just make sure your case isn't
sitting on thick carpeting, blocking fresh air from getting to the fans.
Common and Ideal Fan Arrangements
There are a number of different ways to configure your fans. The ideal fan
arrangement is one that draws in lots of cool air with a direct path up and out of
the PC. Beginning with the best configuration, but requiring the most fans, and
proceeding to less effective arrangements, the most common fan configurations
can incorporate both positive or negative pressure, depending on the number of
fans used in each location.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Front, Rear, Top, and Bottom: In this configuration, the front and bottom fans
draw air into the case, while the top and rear fans exhaust hot air out. This
creates a clear channel across the core components of your computer while also
feeding additional cool air directly upwards. It is similar to the traditional Front
and Rear configuration (described below) but with added air volume to increase
the rate of flow. This scenario provides cool air directly to the GPU and pushes
that air upward, toward the CPU and exhaust fans.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Front, Rear, and Bottom Configuration: This fan arrangement is similar to the
above, but relies on a single rear exhaust fan. It is still a very solid configuration,
but is generally less effective due to the reduced exhaust out of the top of the
case. If you’re considering this configuration and have more than one case fan at
the bottom of the PC, consider moving it to the top of the case for the best
cooling. That's provided, of course, that your case has vents and fan mounting
areas at the top.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Front and Rear Configuration: This is the most common cooling configuration
and is how most PC cases with more than one included fan come pre-
configured; this can work very well. In this arrangement, one or more fans draw
air through the front panel of the case and blow it directly toward the
motherboard. There, the air is consumed by the GPU and CPU and blown into
the channel of the rear exhaust fan, creating a flow from front to back. Keep in
mind, though, that this option won't work nearly as well as it should if your case
front doesn't provide lots of airflow to your intake fans.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Front, Rear, and Top Configuration: This fan organization is all about drawing
the air through the case. It can be less effective than the Front, Rear, Bottom
configuration as it lacks the upward push the bottom case fan provides. Given
strong enough front fans, this can still be an effective arrangement – again,
provided your case front is well ventilated.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Top and Bottom (Chimney) Configuration: This configuration isn’t especially
common these days, but is an option that can work well when mounting front
and rear fans isn’t an option. In this arrangement, fans draw in air from below
the case and blow it upward, across the motherboard, and exhaust it out of the
top of the case. It is best suited for vertical mounted GPUs, as graphics cards
plugged directly into the PCIe slot (when the motherboard is mounted in a
standard orientation) can block the flow of cool air from reaching the CPU.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Rear Fan Only: Some PC cases, especially very cheap ones, come with a single
fan. And when they have a single fan, it’s usually mounted in the rear exhaust.
This is a poor solution and will only work well for low-end components. Without
a source of cool air, components quickly become too hot. Air movement is
minimal with this setup, so if you can, get another fan or two to mount at the
front of the case for intake.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Front Fan Only: This configuration is perhaps the least effective, and is not a
good cooling solution. With a single front fan, cool air is drawn in and then
stagnates without an exhaust fan to draw it back out. Air temperature increases
and that hot air hovers until it naturally rises out of the case. 
If you only have two fans, we recommend positioning them in a front, rear
configuration. If you have three fans and a dedicated GPU, we recommend
placing them in the front, rear, and bottom of your case. With additional fans,
consider the arrangement of your components, any wires or structures that
might impede airflow, and position your fans accordingly to draw air in from the
bottom right (front), flowing to the upper left (rear) of your case.
What About AIOs?
If you’re using an all-in-one CPU cooler, it will come with fans that should be
mounted at the position recommended by the manufacturer. These
components use special, high static pressure fans to force air through the tight
fins of the radiator. There are particular fan arrangements that go along with
these coolers, however.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Push: In this arrangement, the fans push air through the radiator. This is the
most common configuration and the one manufacturers most often
recommend. Depending on whether your case is mounted in the top (as
pictured below) or the front of the case, this will either be pushing warm air out
through the radiator and out of the case or cool air in through the radiator into
the case. Ideally, any air that passes through the hot fins of the radiator will be
immediately expelled from the case; however, mounting options and aesthetic
needs can sometimes limit this choice.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Pull: A pull configuration reverses the fan position to suck air through the fin-
stack. It is not as common and generally not as effective as push-oriented fans.
The same principles about positioning and expelling warm air apply here.
(Image credit: Tom's Hardware)
Push-Pull: This is a popular choice that can increase the effectiveness of an all-
in-one CPU cooler, but requires additional fans and space within your case. A
push-pull configuration uses the AIO’s included fans to push air through the
radiator and then one to three additional fans mounted on the other side, also
oriented to blow in, pulling the air through. It makes for a bulky radiator but
increases its performance overall.
Also note that, when possible, it's best to mount your AIO at the top of your case
(or the rear if it's a 120mm AIO) rather than the front. This way, the heat that the
AIO moves from your CPU to the radiator gets immediately exhausted out of the
case. When a radiator is placed in the front in a pull or push-pull orientation, the
cool air from the outside gets warmed by your CPU heat as it travels through the
radiator, then into the case and across your other heat-generating components
before being exhausted out of the rear and/or top. Obviously, having cooler
outside air that hasn't been pre-heated by your CPU is better for keeping your
components cool.
Conclusion
Cooling is one of the most important considerations for anyone looking to
optimize their PC. With this information, you’re armed to make the best decision
for your particular setup. Ensure that your components have cool air and active
airflow, choos one of the best CPU coolers that we've tested, and you’ll ensure
the best PC performance possible this side of custom water cooling.
Stay On the Cutting Edge: Get the Tom's
Hardware Newsletter
Get Tom's Hardware's best news and in-depth reviews, straight to your
inbox.
Your Email Address
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
SIGN ME UP
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy
and are aged 16 or over.












SEE MORE COOLING HOW TO 
RSS SearchUK Edition
 Reviews Best Picks Raspberry Pi CPUs GPUs News Coupons More  Forums
Corsair Frame 4000D Case Review: Lightweight, effective, and right-
priced
LATEST IN CASE FANS
Arctic uses a fan to cool another fan — S12038-4K 120mm fan adds an
extra fan in its center to cool its central shaft
Noctua shares a fan grill design that drops noise levels — 3D print your
own 120mm fan grill like the one on the Seasonic x Noctua 1,600W power
supply
Adata XPG debuts two-click reversible, magnetic Hurricane Mag case
fans — power six fans off one cable
Noctua's next-gen 140mm fans debut – NF-A14x25 G2s promise improved
performance, deliver the same amount of brown
PWM vs DC fans: Which should you buy for PC cooling
be quiet! announces highly configurable PC cases and illuminated fans
that bring light into the darkness
LATEST IN HOW-TO
The Best OctoPrint Plugins
How to use the Warp AI-enabled terminal for Windows or Linux
6 Best Online Slicers to Try — 3D Slice on the Cloud
How to Zoom in and Out in Windows 11 or 10
How to Restart Windows Explorer in Windows 11
How to fix Salmon Skin Problems in 3D Prints
Tom's Hardware is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.
Terms and conditions Contact Future's experts Privacy policy Cookies policy
Accessibility Statement Advertise with us About Us Coupons
Careers GDPR consent
© Future Publishing Limited Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration number
2008885.
