POPULAR Schedule 1 Doom: The Dark Ages Monster Hunter Wilds AC Shadows Marvel Rivals
(Image credit: G.Skill)
Jacob Ridley Managing Editor, Hardware
Jacob earned his first byline writing for his own tech blog. From there, he
graduated to professionally breaking things as hardware writer at PCGamesN,
and would go on to run the team as hardware editor. He joined PC Gamer's top
staff as senior hardware editor before becoming managing editor of the
hardware team, and you'll now find him reporting on the latest developments
in the technology and gaming industries and testing the newest PC
components.
With contributions from
Ryan Fisher
READ MORE
PCs with Intel's new warranty-backed 'IPO' overclocking feature
reportedly go on sale in China with claimed 10% frame-rate uplifts but
what about the rest of us?
Best RAM for gaming in 2025: I've tested the best DDR4 and DDR5 RAM to
find the right kits for you
MSI B850 motherboards: The best choice for work or play
This MSI Afterburner file unlocks 36 Gbps RTX 50-series memory
overclocks for, y'know, the few people that actually own a card
G.Skill's 128 GB golden RAM kit is the first high-capacity set to hit DDR5-
8000 speeds and it's making me reconsider my views on PC hardware
bling
With a quick BIOS flash and a spot of overclocking, one modder has got
his RX 9070 to outperform the normally faster RX 9070 XT
LATEST IN MEMORY
Samsung rakes in nearly $5 billion profit from companies hoarding
memory chips like Smaug ahead of Trump's tumultuous tariffs
G.Skill's 128 GB golden RAM kit is the first high-capacity set to hit DDR5-
8000 speeds and it's making me reconsider my views on PC hardware
bling
Corsair Vengeance DDR5-8400 CUDIMM review
Corsair's new 'personalised RAM' gives you the option to pick the look
and speed of memory you hide in the case anyway
Corsair rolls out its first CUDIMM memory sticks for Intel Arrow Lake
gaming PCs and they're as pricey as you'd expect them to be
G.SKILL and Kingston break the 12,000MT/s DDR5 memory barrier with
Intel's new Arrow Lake CPU
LATEST IN FEATURES
Hardware  >  Memory
What are XMP and EXPO pro8les
and how do I use them?
Features By Jacob Ridley Contributions from Ryan Fisher last updated 29 February 2024
XMP and EXPO pro-les automatically set your system RAM to higher
frequencies. Here's how to do it.
 
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s
how it works.
XMP or Extreme Memory Profiles, is an Intel technology that allows you to
change multiple memory settings, whereas EXPO is the AMD equivalent. Both
methods enable higher memory speeds simply by selecting a profile in your
motherboard BIOS, providing you have the correct supported RAM. 
While XMP itself has the term "Profiles" in the acronym, "XMP profiles" is the
common term for different settings for different levels of RAM overclocking. Yep,
we know, but the grammar police were apparently sleeping on this one.
Still, If you’ve ever wanted to overclock your memory but didn’t want to fiddle
with frequency, voltage and timings, this is the way to do it.
YOU MAY LIKE
PCs with Intel's new warranty-backed 'IPO' overclocking feature
reportedly go on sale in China with claimed 10% frame-rate uplifts but
what about the rest of us?
Best RAM for gaming in 2025: I've tested the best DDR4 and DDR5 RAM to
find the right kits for you
How does XMP memory work?
When you power on your computer, it conducts a power-on self-test. Part of this
process includes automatically configuring installed hardware, including your
memory.
Your computer needs to know the model of your RAM as well as which timings
and frequency to set. Your BIOS will use a small chip on your RAM modules
called an SPD (Serial Presence Detect) chip to set memory timing and
frequencies properly. XMP is an extension of SPD which provides higher
frequencies and tighter timings for your memory to run at. It also corrects for
the extra voltage required which provides a stable overclock with the click of a
button.
XMP profiles essentially allow high-performance RAM, which run above industry
DDR specifications, to be appropriately set up for your system.
HOW DO I ENABLE XMP?
How do I enable XMP?
XMP profiles can be accessed from within the BIOS on supported motherboards.
These profiles may provide different levels of overclocking, which can all be
checked via the BIOS.
There are two major versions of XMP in use today, and which one you can use
depends on your memory and platform:
XMP 2.0: This is common for DDR4 memory. It offers two XMP profiles as
standard.
XMP: 3.0: This was launched alongside DDR5 memory. It offers up to three
XMP profiles as standard and a further two customisable user profiles.
To enabled XMP, simply enter your BIOS at boot by repeatedly pressing the
selected key (this can vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, although most
will tell you which key to press during the boot sequence), find the setting for
XMP or memory speed, enable it and select one of the profiles, save your
settings and reboot. 
If you can't see the setting, make sure that your BIOS is not in "Easy mode", as
some motherboard manufacturers have two different sets of settings available,
and "Advanced mode" may enable the option for XMP profiles.
Once you're back inside Windows, ]you can confirm your new overclock using a
program such as CPU-Z to check the memory speeds. Remember that your RAM
is DDR or Double Data Rate, so the RAM frequency will register as half your
actual speed, i.e. if your XMP profile is set to DDR3200, the frequency in MHz will
be shown as 1,600MHz.
What if I don't turn on XMP?
All high-performance RAM uses XMP profiles, because they all run above
standard DDR industry specifications. If you don't enable XMP, they will run at
your system's standard specifications that are dependent on the CPU you have.
That is to say, you won't take advantage of the higher clock speeds that your
RAM may have.
In most circumstances, this will be fine. Your system will simply run to spec, and
you can rest easy knowing everything is nice and stable. However, XMP allows
your system to set motherboard and CPU parameters correctly, to allow higher
frequency RAM modules, that are designed to run beyond usual specifications.
Failing XMP you could always find out the XMP profile speeds and feeds for your
RAM and enable them manually in your BIOS.
Why are there multiple XMP pro8les?
XMP supported modules contain two or three factory set memory profiles,
depending on which version of XMP you have available. That'll be either XMP 2.0
or XMP 3.0. 
The first profile usually contains enthusiast settings; these allow your memory to
run at the rated speed advertised on the box. These settings enable only a
modest overclock and are also the most stable. The second profile often
contains more extreme settings that offer a much higher level of performance.
The third profile is usually similarly set up for more extreme memory, too. 
It's worth noting that these XMP profiles are set by the manufacturer, so may
differ between memory sticks. XMP 3.0 also offers two user-configurable profiles
for your own fine-tuning.
Is XMP stable?
Any time overclocking is involved, there is a risk of instability. With XMP the
configurations included are thoroughly tested for the specific memory you are
using, however. The timings, voltage and frequency are set to compliment each
other and mitigate much of the instability that can creep up with a manual
overclock. 
No automatic configuration can account for outside factors, though, such as a
CPU overclock. This is something to keep in mind if you experience any
instability.
Similarly, if you're mixing and matching RAM sticks from different sets, you may
be limited in which XMP profiles are stable. Usually the top speed of the worst
set of RAM sticks is your best bet for stable operation, but you may still be able
to push speeds and latency further if required.
What are the differences between XMP 2.0 and XMP 3.0?
XMP 3.0 offers more profiles than XMP 2.0, for greater fine tuning of your
memory's speeds and latency. It's been introduce alongside new DDR5 memory,
and is able to offer three factory set XMP profiles out of the box and two user
configurable profiles if you prefer to go it alone. These profiles can also be
renamed.
XMP 3.0 also comes with support for more standardised voltage control through
DDR5's integrated voltage regulator.
Perhaps the most exciting feature to arrive alongside XMP 3.0 is Intel's Dynamic
Memory Boost Technology. This automatically switches between JEDEC standard
and XMP memory profiles for preferred performance and efficiency at any given
time. This is an Intel platform feature, however, so AMD chips won't be able to
utilise it even with XMP memory installed.
(Image credit: AMD)
Do AMD compatible motherboards support XMP?
Yes. You'll find most AM4 and AM5 Ryzen-compatible motherboards offer
compatibility for XMP. However, you may still find reference to AMD's now-
legacy technology AMP, or X-AMP, on occasion, and since the release of the AM5
socket AMD has had its own XMP equivalent, AMD EXPO for DDR5 RAM.
AMP stands for AMD Memory Profile, and though it's been around for a long
time now it has never quite reached a level of market saturation that Intel's XMP
has. It is essentially one and the same with XMP in practice, however—with a
compatible memory kit, it makes it easy to enable faster memory profiles. Some
motherboard manufacturers also took this into their own hands with DOCP and
EOCP, which essentially turn XMP on for AMD boards using memory SPD
settings. You don't often see these in use anymore, though, and you'd be hard-
pressed to find memory with AMP-specific speeds nowadays.
What is AMD EXPO?
AMD EXPO or Extended Profile for Overclocking is the AMD equivalent to Intel's
XMP profiles and is only available for supported DDR5 RAM and motherboards.
Like XMP profiles, they act as automatic pre-tested overclocking profiles that can
be enable in your BIOS for better performance.  
DDR5 RAM sticks will most often run at 4,800 MT/s by default, and need an XMP
or EXPO profile enabled in order to reach higher speeds. EXPO profiles are
optimised for Ryzen 7000 series CPUs, and AMD claim they can provide up to
11% performance gains for 1080p gaming, and lower latency times over non-
EXPO enabled RAM running at default speeds.
HOW DO I ENABLE AMD EXPO?
How do I enable AMD EXPO?
Much like XMP profiles, EXPO profiles are also enabled by your motherboard
BIOS. Once EXPO supported RAM has been installed, enter your BIOS by hitting
the required key while your PC is booting and before the Windows login screen.
This will vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, but is usually activated by
continuously pressing a key, often Delete or F2 at startup before the Windows
boot screen.
You can also restart your PC by holding down shift and selecting the Restart
option from the Windows start menu. This will reboot your PC into a selection of
startup options and one of these should be an option to boot into UEFI settings,
which is your BIOS.
Once within your BIOS, navigate to the menu location where you are able to
adjust memory profiles. Again, this will vary between boards, so consult your
motherboard manual or online documentation to find the exact menu you need.
If you're struggling to find the option and you are certain both your RAM and
your motherboard support EXPO profiles, check to make sure that your BIOS is
not in "Easy mode", as some motherboard manufacturers have two different
sets of settings available, and "Advanced mode" or similar may enable the
options you need.
Once you've found the AMD EXPO option, change it from "disabled" to
"enabled", and make sure to remember to save and exit rather than just exiting
the BIOS to ensure your new setting is saved.
Once your PC reboots and you're back in Windows, you can use a free
application like CPU-Z to check to see if your setting change has been successful.
If you've successfully enable EXPO, your memory operating frequency should
match the rated speeds of your RAM, i.e. if you purchased 6,000 MT/s RAM you
should now see a DRAM frequency of 3,000 MHz. 
Remember that your RAM is DDR, or Double Data Rate, so two times the DRAM
frequency here equals your full 6,000 MT/s rate, and in this example your EXPO
configuration would be enabled successfully. 
LATEST VIDEOS FROM PC GAMER
 
DDR3 DDR4 DDR5
2 2 3
None None 2
No No Yes
No No Yes
No No Yes
78 102 384
XMP version comparison table
XMP 1.0 XMP 2.0 XMP 3.0
The biggest gaming news, reviews and hardware deals
Keep up to date with the most important stories and the best deals, as
picked by the PC Gamer team.
Your Email Address
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
SIGN ME UP
By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy
and are aged 16 or over.
HARDWARE
BUYING GUIDES
LATEST GAME
REVIEWS
1 Best Steam Deck accessories
in Australia for 2025: Our
favorite docks, powerbanks
and gamepads
2 Best graphics card for laptops
in 2025: the mobile GPUs I'd
want in my next gaming laptop
3 Best mini PCs in 2025: The
compact computers I love the
most
4 Best 14-inch gaming laptop in
2025: The top compact gaming
laptops I've held in these hands
5 Best Mini-ITX motherboards in
2025: My pick from all the mini
mobo marvels I've tested
Memory
Technology
Vendor
profiles
(static)
Rewritable
profiles
Descriptive
profile
names
CRC
Checksum
On Module
voltage
control
Total bytes
allocated to
XMP
Jump To:
How do I enable
XMP?
How do I enable
AMD EXPO?
SUBSCRIBETHE GLOBAL AUTHORITY ON PC GAMES Sign in
 Games Hardware Software Movies & TV Gaming Industry News Reviews More 

Rematch blew away my expectations: trailers don't do Sloclap's 5v5
football game justice
My favorite thing about Blue Prince's intricate puzzles is that they're
optional—you don't have to solve most of them to finish the game
Marvel Rivals Season 2 is fire, mostly thanks to Emma Frost's ability to
choke slam other heroes out of their ultimate abilities
The next game from the creator of Hyper Light Drifter is a Toonami-core
anime throwback set in one of the most interesting Metroid-style worlds
I've seen in a while
Crimson Desert is an unrestrained feast of violence, with a toolkit of
moves that's like a fusion of every action RPG protagonist of the past
decade rolled into one
The 5 most historically inaccurate moments in the Assassin's Creed
series
PC Gamer is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.
About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy
Cookies policy Advertise with us Accessibility Statement Careers
GDPR consent
© Future Publishing Limited Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration number
2008885.
